Generalized Zeno effect and entanglement dynamics induced by fermion counting
Elias Starchl,1 Mark H. Fischer,2 and Lukas M. Sieberer1, ∗

arXiv:2406.07673v2 [quant-ph] 12 Feb 2025

2

1
Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria
Department of Physics, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland
(Dated: February 13, 2025)

We study a one-dimensional lattice system of free fermions subjected to a generalized measurement process:
the system exchanges particles with its environment, but each fermion leaving or entering the system is counted.
In contrast to the freezing of dynamics due to frequent measurements of lattice site occupation numbers, a high
rate of fermion counts induces fast fluctuations in the state of the system. Still, through numerical simulations of
quantum trajectories and an analytical approach based on replica Keldysh field theory, we find that instantaneous
correlations and entanglement properties of free fermions subjected to fermion counting and local occupation
measurements are strikingly similar. We explain this similarity through a generalized Zeno effect induced by
fermion counting and a universal long-wavelength description in terms of a nonlinear sigma model. The physical
requirements underlying this universal emergent behavior are conservation of the total number of particles in
the system and its environment, and conservation of the purity of the state of the system by keeping a full record
of all measurement outcomes. For both types of measurement processes, we present strong evidence against
the existence of a critical phase with logarithmic entanglement and conformal invariance. Instead, we identify
a finite critical range of length scales on which signatures of conformal invariance are observable. While arealaw entanglement is established beyond a scale that is exponentially large in the measurement rate, the upper
boundary of the critical range is only algebraically large and thus numerically accessible. Our finding that these
properties do not rely on particle number conservation has far reaching implications for measurement-induced
phenomena beyond noninteracting fermions, such as charge sharpening in random quantum circuits or generic
interacting systems.

I.

Introduction

Frequent projective measurements induce the quantum
Zeno effect, the freezing of the evolution of a quantum system in an eigenstate of the measured observable [1]. For measurements of local observables in a spatially extended manybody system, these eigenstates exhibit area-law scaling of the
entanglement entropy. The quantum Zeno effect, thus, stabilizes area-law entanglement even in systems that would in
the absence of measurements unitarily evolve toward volumelaw entanglement. Reducing the rate at which measurements
are performed can lead to a novel type of dynamical phase
transition between area-law and volume-law scaling of the entanglement entropy. Such measurement-induced phase transitions have first been described in quantum circuits [2–24] but
occur also in the continuous-time dynamics of fermionic [25–
53], bosonic [54–58], and spin systems [59–65]. Experimental studies of measurement-induced phase transitions have
been performed with trapped ions [66, 67] and superconducting qubits [68–70]. While the freezing of dynamics provides
an intuitive explanation for area-law entanglement through repeated measurements, is it also a requirement? As we detail
in the following, this question is of fundamental relevance for
systems that are subjected to generalized measurements.
A generalized measurement is described by a collection of
measurement operators M̂n , which obey the completeness reP
lation n M̂n† M̂n = 1, where the sum is over possible measurement outcomes labeled by the index n [71]. If the state of a
quantum system immediately before a generalized measurement performed at time t is |ψ(t)⟩, then the outcome n occurs

∗ lukas.sieberer@uibk.ac.at

D
E
with probability pn (t) = ψ(t) M̂n† M̂n ψ(t) , and the state of the
system after the measurement is
|ψ(t + 0+ )⟩ = p

1
pn (t)

M̂n |ψ(t)⟩.

(1)

Crucially, the measurement operators M̂n need not be projectors. If they are not, performing a generalized measurement
immediately after a measurement with outcome n does generally not yield the same result n. As such, repeated generalized
measurements do not lead to a freezing of the dynamics.
Here, we describe a novel mechanism that stabilizes arealaw entanglement through measurements but does not require
the freezing of the dynamics associated with the conventional
Zeno effect. We consider a one-dimensional (1D) lattice
model of free fermions subjected to monitored loss and gain
as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). That is, each lattice site is coupled to two reservoirs, acting as drain and source of particles. The occupation of the reservoirs is monitored continuously, such that each fermion that leaves or enters the system
is registered. This setup is analogous to photon counting in
quantum optics [72, 73]. There, a physical system such as
an atom excited by a laser, or a leaky cavity, emits photons
into the surrounding electromagnetic field. The electromagnetic field thus acts as an empty reservoir, and a photodetector
continuously checks whether there is a photon present. Even
though each site of the fermionic lattice system we consider
is coupled to two reservoirs and can both “emit” and “absorb”
fermions, the analogy to photon counting suggests to refer to
monitored loss and gain of fermions as fermion counting.
The process of fermion counting can be theoretically modeled as a continuous generalized measurement, where each
measurement operator removes or adds a fermion at a particular lattice site. A high rate of fermion counts causes the

2

Figure 1. The two generalized measurement processes we consider
are (a) monitored loss and gain or fermion counting and (b) generalized occupation measurements. (a) Each site of the lattice (filled and
empty circles) with hopping amplitude J is coupled to two reservoirs
acting as drain (empty green circle) and source (filled orange circle)
of fermions, respectively. The occupations of the reservoirs are monitored continuously, such that each fermion leaving or entering the
system is counted. (b) Each site is coupled to a source and drain in a
way that tunneling of reservoir fermions from the source to the drain
is possible only if the system site is occupied. The detection of tunneling events thus indicates the presence of fermions in the system.
Details are provided in Sec. III and Appendices A and B. Generalized
measurements in (a) and (b), which are implemented by coupling the
system to auxiliary systems on which projective measurements are
performed, should be contrasted with (c) projective measurements of
occupation numbers performed directly on the system.

number of fermions and thus the state of the system to fluctuate rapidly. At the same time, the local removal and addition
of particles efficiently disentangles the many-body wave function similarly to generalized [28] or projective [41] measurements of local occupation numbers. These latter two types of
measurements, which are illustrated in Figs. 1(b) and (c), conserve the total number of particles in the system, and induce a
Zeno effect in the frequent-measurement limit.
In this work, we perform a comparative study of fermion
counting and generalized measurements of local occupation
numbers to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the similarities and differences between these scenarios. Despite their
starkly different dynamics, both models exhibit almost identical steady-state correlations and entanglement properties. We
trace this striking similarity back to a generalized Zeno effect
induced by fermion counting. The key feature the conventional and generalized Zeno effects have in common is the
suppression of coherent dynamics, leading in turn to a suppression of the growth of entanglement.
More formally, we explain the near indistinguishability of
the correlations and entanglement properties of the models
through a common long-wavelength effective field theory. In
particular, both models are described by a nonlinear sigma
model (NLSM), which can be derived in the framework of
replica Keldysh field theory [20, 41, 42, 44]. The predictions
from this analytical description are in good agreement with

our numerical results and provide strong evidence that both
types of measurements lead to area-law entanglement for any
nonzero measurement rate γ.
Recent studies have led to contradictory results concerning
the existence of a measurement-induced entanglement transition in 1D free fermions with conserved number of particles.
Entanglement dynamics under continuous measurements of
occupation numbers, described by either quantum state diffusion [74] or quantum jump trajectories [75] as considered
in this work, were studied in Ref. [28]. For both types of
dynamics, there is numerical evidence for a measurementinduced Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) transition at a finite critical
measurement rate γc , separating a critical phase with logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy as characteristic for
a one-dimensional conformal field theory (CFT) [76] from an
area-law phase. These findings suggest that the precise way
in which measurements are implemented might affect nonuniversal properties such as the value of the critical measurement
rate, but not whether there is a transition or not. Therefore,
one is led to assume that this question is decided by the emergent long-wavelength behavior, which is universal in the sense
that it is determined solely by spatial dimensionality and symmetries. In turn, symmetries are reflected in conservation laws
and in both quantum state diffusion and quantum jump trajectories, the number of particles is the only conserved quantity. The existence of a measurement-induced phase transition
in one-dimensional free fermions with particle number conservation is corroborated by replica Keldysh theory for Dirac
fermions with a linear dispersion relation [30].
However, based on the above assumption of universality,
we should compare the results of Refs. [28, 30] to the findings
of Ref. [41], which studied free fermions under random projective measurements of occupation numbers. Analytical and
numerical results obtained in Ref. [41] indicate that there is no
measurement-induced phase transition, in agreement with numerical findings of Refs. [32, 43]. Instead, for any finite measurement rate γ, the logarithmic growth of the entanglement
entropy transitions into area-law behavior above an exponentially large scale ln(l∗ ) ∼ γ−1 [41, 51–53]. For small values of
the measurement rate, for which the theory is expected to become quantitatively accurate, this scale is beyond numerically
accessible system sizes.
Here, we show analytically and numerically that clear signatures of the crossover to area-law entanglement can be observed on much smaller scales, well within the reach of finitesize numerics. Approximately logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy is restricted to a critical range of length
scales, bounded from below by l0 ∼ γ−1 and from above by
lc ∼ γ−2 . Only within this critical range, we observe clear
signatures of conformal invariance [28].
These results apply both to fermion counting and to generalized measurements of local occupation numbers, and thus
show that particle number conservation is, in fact, not a necessary precondition for the observed phenomenology of stationary correlations and entanglement. Instead, we show that the
two necessary requirements for the SU(R) symmetry underlying the NLSM to occur in free fermionic systems are (i) the
conservation of the total number of particles in the system and

3
auxiliary reservoirs as illustrated in Fig. 1, and (ii) the conservation of the purity of the state of the system. The purity is ensured by keeping a full record of the measurement outcomes.
In particular, the SU(R) symmetry can be broken by inefficient detection, which can be modeled theoretically by averaging over a fraction of the measurement results [75]. Combining measurements that obey conditions (i) and (ii) with dynamics generated by a generic hopping Hamiltonian leads to
an NLSM with target manifold SU(R). Note that if the hopping matrix has particle-hole symmetry—which is the case for
the nearest-neighbor hopping with real hopping amplitudes
we consider in this work—the target manifold is modified to
SU(2R)/Sp(R) [19, 51, 53]. However, both types of NLSMs
have the same qualitative properties.
Our work thus clarifies the impact of particle-number
conservation on the measurement-induced dynamics of pure
states of 1D free fermionic systems: There is no entanglement
transition if the Hamiltonian does conserve the number of particles, and measurements conserve the total number of particles in the system and auxiliary reservoirs that are required
to implement the measurements. This includes the stronger
condition that measurements conserve the number of particles in the system alone. In contrast, there can be a transition if these conditions are violated as in the Majorana model
of Ref. [44], where the Hamiltonian and, depending on the
choice of parameters, also the measurement operators break
particle-number conservation.
While we focus here on free fermionic systems, our finding that particle-number conservation is not fundamental for
the observed entanglement properties has far reaching implications beyond this class of models. For example, random quantum circuits with a conserved charge have been
shown to exhibit a measurement-induced charge-sharpening
transition that separates phases in which measurements can
and cannot efficiently reveal the total charge of the system [17, 18, 21, 67]. Very recently, charge sharpening has also
been discussed for interacting fermions [52, 53]. Our findings
show that charge sharpening can occur even in the absence of
charge conservation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we
summarize our key results. The models we study are introduced in Sec. III. Then, in Sec. IV, we describe signatures of
the conventional and generalized Zeno effects for occupation
measurements and fermion counting, respectively. An analytical description of our models in terms of a replica Keldysh
field theory is introduced in Sec. V. We analyze the Gaussian field theory that applies in the weak-measurement limit
in Sec. VI, and discuss the effect of fluctuations beyond the
Gaussian theory in Sec. VII. A detailed comparison between
our analytical predictions and numerical results is provided in
Sec. VIII, where we consider spatial correlations, measures of
entanglement, and signatures of conformal invariance in the
steady state. Section IX contains our conclusions and an outlook on future research questions. Details of our analytical
and numerical studies are described in several appendices.

Figure 2. (a) Zeno effect for fermions on a one-dimensional lattice subjected to measurements of local occupation numbers. Frequent measurements freeze the system in a classical configuration
with each lattice site either occupied or empty (filled and empty circles). Incoherent hopping occurs at the slow rate ν = J 2 /γ. (b)
Generalized Zeno effect induced by fermion counting. A high rate
γ of fermion counts corresponds to fast transitions between classical
configurations. As in the conventional Zeno effect, additional slow
processes occur at the rate ν. (c) Schematic finite-size phase diagram
for fermion counting and occupation measurements. For low measurement rates, the entanglement exhibits volume-law scaling below
l0 ∼ γ−1 and grows logarithmically in the critical range between l0
and lc ∼ γ−2 , before it slowly crosses over to area-low scaling, which
is established beyond the exponentially large scale ln(l∗ ) ∼ γ−1 . Inset: the effective central charge cℓ has a maximum at ℓmax,c ∼ γ−3/2 .

II.

Key results

We have obtained the following results through analytical
and numerical studies of free fermions on a 1D lattice subjected to fermion counting or generalized measurements of
local lattice site occupation numbers:
(I) Frequent particle loss and gain suppress coherent dynamics and stabilize area-law entanglement via a generalized
Zeno effect. Before we explain the generalized Zeno effect,
let us briefly recall the conventional Zeno effect for a single
particle on a one-dimensional lattice, subjected to repeated
generalized measurements of lattice site occupation numbers,
M̂l = n̂l . The first measurement collapses the initial wave
function |ψ⟩ of the particle to a state |l0 ⟩ that is localized on a
single lattice site l0 , chosen from l ∈ {1, . . . , L} according to
Born’s rule with probability pl = ⟨ψ|n̂l |ψ⟩. Subsequent measurements, performed at a rate γ, yield the same result l0 , since
the probability distribution after the first collapse is pl = δl,l0 .
Coherent hopping with amplitude J ≪ γ can induce transitions |l0 ⟩ → |l0 ± 1⟩. However, these processes occur at second
order in perturbation theory, in other words with a small rate
ν = J 2 /γ. This suppression of coherent dynamics through fre-

4
quent measurements is the essence of the conventional Zeno
effect. The resultant slow dynamics are illustrated for a manybody system in Fig. 2(a).
To illustrate the generalized Zeno effect, we first consider
a single fermionic lattice site with annihilation and creation
operators ψ̂ and ψ̂† , respectively. Monitored loss and gain or
fermion counting is described by generalized measurements
performed at a rate γ and with measurement operators M̂− = ψ̂
and M̂+ = ψ̂† . The completeness relation M̂−† M̂− + M̂+† M̂+ = 1
follows from canonical anticommutation relations. Repeated
measurements cause the occupation of the lattice site to fluctuate between 0 and 1, realizing a random telegraph process [77]. The autocorrelation function of the occupation
number n̂ = ψ̂† ψ̂ decays exponentially with a rate ∼ γ. That is,
the dynamics become faster for increasing measurement rate
γ—the exact opposite of the freezing of the dynamics in the
conventional Zeno effect.
In an extended lattice system with monitored loss and gain
on each lattice site, the dynamics induced by measurements
allow the system to ergodically explore all classical configurations of N ∈ {0, . . . , L} particles distributed on L lattice
sites. Coherent hopping enables additional transitions between these configurations. Crucially, in analogy to the conventional Zeno effect, these transitions are suppressed for
J ≪ γ and occur with a slow rate ν = J 2 /γ ≪ γ. Therefore,
we refer to this phenomenon, which is illustrated in Fig. 2(b),
as a generalized Zeno effect. The facts that coherent dynamics
are suppressed by frequent fermion counts and that the classical configurations, which dominate the dynamics for J ≪ γ,
have vanishing entanglement entropy rationalize that fermion
counting stabilizes area-law entanglement.
(II) The generalized and conventional Zeno effects induce
almost identical correlations and entanglement properties.
Even though the dynamics are strikingly different for fermion
counting and occupation measurements, both lead to equivalent behavior in various measures of correlations and entanglement in the steady state. This includes density-density
correlations, the entanglement entropy, and the bipartite mutual information. We observe a qualitative difference only in
higher-order correlations as quantified through the tripartite
mutual information, indicating that the tripartite mutual information probes properties that are not captured by the longwavelength effective field theory, which is the same for both
models as described next.
(III) The similarity of correlations and entanglement
properties can be explained in terms of a universal long-wavelength effective field theory. Starting from a microscopic
model of the fermionic lattice system shown in Fig. 1(a),
with each site coherently coupled to particle reservoirs acting as drain and source, a natural description of the dynamics of the system alone can be given in terms of a stochastic
Schrödinger equation [75]. This equation describes the evolution of the state |ψ(t)⟩ of the system conditioned on the counting of fermions that are transferred between the system and
reservoirs. For equal rates of fermion loss and gain, the same
quantum trajectories |ψ(t)⟩ are obtained from a description of
fermion counting as generalized measurements that are performed at random times and with outcomes determined by

Born’s rule. This equivalence enables an analytical description of the system dynamics in terms of a replica Keldysh field
theory [20, 41, 42, 44, 47, 51–53], which we adopt to the case
of generalized measurements.
The field theory approach gives access to two types of
observables: (i) Observables that are linear in the projector on the conditional state ρ̂(t) = |ψ(t)⟩⟨ψ(t)|, such as
D
E
expectation values Â(t) or temporal correlation functions
D
E
Â(t) B̂(t′ ) , where the overbar denotes the average over trajectories; (ii) instantaneous observables that are nonlinear
in ρ̂(t), such as connected equal-time correlation functions
D
E D
ED
E
Â(t) B̂(t) − Â(t) B̂(t) or the entanglement entropy. Observables of type (i) are encoded in the replica-symmetric sector of the theory, and observables of type (ii) in the replicaasymmetric or replicon sector.
Fermion counting leads to exponential decay of the density
autocorrelation function, which is an observable of type (i).
Instead, particle-number conservation in the model with occupation measurements leads to diffusive decay. Formally,
this difference between exponential and algebraic decay is
reflected in the replica-symmetric sector being massive and
massless for fermion counting and occupation measurements,
respectively. In contrast, the replicon sector is described in
both cases by the same massless long-wavelength effective
field theory that takes the form of an NLSM. While the Hamiltonian we consider obeys particle-hole symmetry, leading to
an NLSM with target manifold SU(2R)/Sp(R), the target manifold for the generic case is SU(R). Crucially, the qualitative
behavior remains unchanged. This common long-wavelength
effective field theory description analytically explains the numerically observed equivalence of correlations and entanglement properties. Importantly, the theory predicts that there
is no measurement-induced entanglement transition in these
models. Instead, area-law entanglement is established for any
nonzero measurement rate.
(IV) Particle-number conservation is not necessary for
the occurrence of the SU(R) symmetry underlying the NLSM,
and thus the absence of an entanglement transition. A peculiar feature of measurement-induced phenomena is that both
the dynamics and the observables of main interest are nonlinear in the quantum state of the system. This nonlinearity
of the dynamics is due to the necessity to normalize the state
after each measurement; the key nonlinear observable is the
entanglement entropy. Nevertheless, it is possible to obtain a
theoretical description that is linear in the state by introducing
R replicas of the system [6, 20]. Consequently, it is not sufficient to study the symmetries of the unitary time evolution
operator and measurement operators of a single realization of
the system to fully understand relevant symmetries of the dynamics. Instead, one has to study symmetries of the dynamics
of R replicas to obtain a comprehensive picture.
If the unitary dynamics and measurement operators of a single realization of the system of interest have the symmetry
group G, then the symmetry group of R replicas is GR ⋊ SR ,
where SR is the group of permutations of R replicas. Conservation of the number of particles corresponds to G = U(1)—
for the moment, we disregard a possible additional particle-

5
hole symmetry of the Hamiltonian—leading to the symmetry
group U(1)R ⋊ SR for generic interacting fermions. This is
enhanced to U(R) for free fermions, where it is possible to
not only perform discrete permutations of replicas but even
continuous rotations between them [10, 19, 30, 41, 44]. For
example, the dynamics of R replicas of free fermions subjected to random projective measurements of lattice site occupation numbers studied in Ref. [41] are invariant under
U(R) rotations. In a replica Keldysh field theory description
of this model, the decomposition U(R) = U(1) ⋊ SU(R) has
been found to emerge naturally: Goldstone modes associated
with U(1) and SU(R) determine the long-wavelength behavior
of the replica-symmetric and replicon sectors of the theory,
respectively, and these sectors decouple for sufficiently rare
measurements, γ ≪ J. However it has not been recognized
before, that in the above decomposition only the first factor, U(1), requires particle-number conservation; as we show,
SU(R) symmetry is an exact property, realized on the microscopic level of the theory, even for fermion counting, where
the number of particles is not conserved. Note, finally, that an
additional particle-hole symmetry of the hopping Hamiltonian
can be incorporated in the field theory description by introducing a combined 2R-dimensional particle-hole and replica
space [53]. Then, the microscopic SU(R) symmetry is enhanced to SU(2R), which becomes U(2R) = U(1) ⋊ SU(2R)
for measurements that conserve the number of particles.
Our finding, that the SU(R) symmetry underlying the emergence of an NLSM at long wavelengths does not require
particle-number conservation, indicates that phenomena that
have so far been discussed for systems with particle-number
conservation can, in fact, occur also when particle-number
conservation is broken. A case in point is the chargesharpening transition in random quantum circuits [17, 18, 21,
67] and interacting fermionic systems [52, 53].
(V) The necessary conditions for the SU(R) symmetry to
occur are (i) conservation of the total number of particles
in the system and auxiliary reservoirs, and (ii) preservation
of the purity of the state. The implementation of fermion
counting illustrated in Fig. 1(a) relies on coupling each site of
the fermionic lattice system to two auxiliary reservoirs, such
that the total number of particles in the system and reservoirs
is conserved. We show that under this condition and the additional condition that all measurement outcomes are recorded
such that the state of the system remains pure, the dynamics of R replicas feature the SU(R) symmetry underlying both
the SU(2R)/Sp(R) and SU(R) NLSMs for hopping Hamiltonians with and without particle-hole symmetry, respectively.
In contrast, the symmetry is broken for inefficient detection,
meaning some of the fermions that are transferred between
the system and reservoirs remain undetected. These two conditions, therefore, provide a physical explanation for the observed phenomenology in terms of conservation laws, which
complements the more heuristic reasoning in terms of the generalized Zeno effect. Furthermore, by identifying these conditions, we settle the question about the requirements to observe a measurement-induced entanglement transition in onedimensional free fermions. Let us reiterate that such a transition does not occur for particle-number-conserving models

of random generalized [28] or projective measurements [41],
or for fermion counting with a conserved total number of particles. Instead, such a transition does occur in the Majorana
model of Ref. [44], where particle-number conservation is
broken by the Hamiltonian that generates the unitary dynamics and, depending on the choice of parameters, also by the
measurement operators. We find the long-wavelength effective replicon field theory to be identical for fermion counting
as well as particle-number conserving measurements of occupation numbers [41, 42, 47, 51–53], but different for the
Majorana model [44].
(VI) Logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy and
signatures of conformal invariance are observable within a
well-defined and finite critical range of length scales. The
renormalization-group (RG) flows of the SU(2R)/Sp(R) and
SU(R) NLSMs are qualitatively the same and indicate that
area-law entanglement is established beyond a scale l∗ that is
exponentially large in γ−1 . However, the RG-corrected Gaussian field theory predicts that for small measurement rates γ,
properties that are characteristic for a critical phase can be observed within a finite critical range of length scales between
l0 ∼ γ−1 and lc ∼ γ−2 as illustrated in Fig. 2(c). These characteristics include logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy and signatures of conformal invariance [28]. Beyond
lc , there is a wide crossover region that separates the critical
range from the onset of area-law scaling. Since lc is only algebraically large in γ, this scale is numerically accessible also
for relatively small values of the measurement rate, even if
area-law scaling beyond l∗ is not observable.
To precisely characterize the behavior of the entanglement entropy, we introduce a scale-dependent effective central charge cℓ for a subsystem of size ℓ. On short scales
ℓ ≲ l0 ∼ γ−1 , the effective central charge cℓ grows with ℓ, indicating volume-law scaling of the entanglement entropy; on
an intermediate scale ℓ = ℓmax,c ∼ γ−3/2 , the central charge exhibits a maximum and thus becomes stationary, leading to logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy; on large scales
ℓ ≳ lc ∼ γ−2 , the central charge decreases; and finally, beyond the exponentially large scale l∗ , cℓ is expected to vanish, corresponding to area-law entanglement. The numerically
observed behavior of the effective central charge, illustrated
schematically in Fig. 2(c), is in good agreement with our analytical predictions.
Evidence for emergent conformal invariance is provided by
the collapse of the mutual information as a function of the
cross ratio with the form predicted by conformal field theory [28, 78]. We perform a systematic numerical analysis of
the mutual information for varying subsystem sizes, which reveals that this collapse occurs only for subsystem sizes within
the critical range, corroborating that conformal invariance is
violated at both short and large scales.
The results described above apply equally to fermion counting and occupation measurements. Differences between the
two types of generalized measurements and deviations from
conformal invariance even within the critical range can be
seen in the tripartite mutual information.
Our detailed analytical and numerical analysis of the
crossover from the critical to the area-law phase corroborates

6
and refines the conclusion of Ref. [41], that the evidence for an
entanglement transition of free fermions presented in Ref. [28]
describes, in fact, a finite-size crossover phenomenon.
III.

Models and time evolution

We consider two models of noninteracting fermions on a
1D lattice undergoing unitary time evolution interspersed with
generalized measurements. In both models, the unitary dynamics are generated by the Hamiltonian
Ĥ = −J

L 
X
l=1


ψ̂†l ψ̂l+1 + ψ̂†l+1 ψ̂l ,

(2)

where ψ̂l and ψ̂†l are fermionic annihilation and creation operators, respectively, on lattice sites l ∈ {1, . . . , L} with periodic boundary conditions, ψ̂L+1 = ψ̂1 . The two models
differ by the types of measurement processes, illustrated in
Figs. 1(a) and (b), respectively: in the first model, we consider
monitored loss and gain or fermion counting; in the second
model, we consider measurements of local occupation numbers, n̂l = ψ̂†l ψ̂l . Our main focus lies on the first model, with
the second serving as a reference. Entanglement dynamics
under continuous and random measurements of local occupation numbers have been studied in Refs. [25, 28], and under
projective random measurements in Ref. [41].
In the following, we present two equivalent ways to describe quantum trajectories, that is, the evolution of the state
vector of the fermionic many-body system, conditioned on
a sequence of measurement outcomes. The first description
in terms of a stochastic Schrödinger equation results naturally from microscopic physical models, such as implementing monitored loss and gain by coupling the system of interest
to reservoirs, as illustrated in Fig. 1 [75]. In the second more
formal description, generalized measurements are performed
directly on the system at an externally imposed constant rate.
This description has the technical advantage of lending itself
naturally toward a reformulation as a replica Keldysh field theory, generalizing the construction of Ref. [41] for projective
measurements. Crucially, the statistics of measurement times
and outcomes, as well as the resulting quantum trajectory dynamics, are identical in both descriptions.
A.

Stochastic Schrödinger equation

A minimal physical model for fermion counting consists of
a quantum dot, meaning a single fermionic lattice site, tunnelcoupled to two fermionic reservoirs. We further assume these
reservoirs to be in thermodynamic equilibrium at a low temperature. The chemical potentials of the reservoirs are chosen
such that fermions can tunnel from the quantum dot to the
first reservoir, the drain, and from the second reservoir, the
source, to the quantum dot, but the reverse processes are inhibited. We obtain a theoretical description of fermion counting by integrating the Schrödinger equation for the quantum
dot and reservoirs in discrete time steps ∆t using the Born and

Markov approximations, in other words treating the coupling
to the reservoirs perturbatively and assuming the reservoirs
to have short correlation times as detailed in Appendix A. At
each time step, the occupations of drain and source are measured projectively. These measurements indirectly count the
number of fermions leaving or entering the quantum dot: finding states of the drain and source to be occupied and empty,
respectively, indicates that a fermion must have left or entered
the quantum dot. A description of the dynamics of the quantum dot alone can be obtained by modeling the sequence of
measurement results through appropriate stochastic processes.
In the continuous-time limit ∆t → dt and generalizing the
setup to L fermionic lattice sites, each in contact with its own
drain and source as sketched in Fig. 1(a), we obtain a stochastic Schrödinger equation for the state |ψ(t)⟩ of the fermionic
lattice system,


L h
XX
i





†
−iĤ −
d|ψ(t)⟩ = 
L̂α,l L̂α,l − p̃α,l (t) 
dt




α=± l=1



L 
XX


 L̂α,l
+
− 1 dNα,l (t) |ψ(t)⟩. (3)
 p
p̃α,l (t)
α=± l=1
The first line describes deterministic dynamics, governed by
the Hamiltonian Ĥ in Eq. (2) and the jump operators
p
p
L̂−,l = γ− /2 ψ̂l ,
L̂+,l = γ+ /2 ψ̂†l ,
(4)
where the loss and gain rates γ− and γ+ , respectively, are determined by microscopic parameters of the model as specified
in Appendix A. Nonnormalized probabilities are defined as
D
E
†
p̃α,l (t) = ψ(t) L̂α,l
L̂α,l ψ(t) .

(5)

The second line of Eq. (3) incorporates the effect of measurements, where dNα,l (t) = 0, 1 are stochastic increments. When
dNα,l (t) = 0, no jump occurs and the wave function evolves
continuously. In contrast, dNα,l (t) = 1 indicates a jump at
time t and site l. For α = −, this jump corresponds to loss of
a fermion; the jump describes gain of a fermion for α = +.
After a jump, the state of the system is
|ψ(t + 0+ )⟩ = p

1
p̃α,l (t)

L̂α,l |ψ(t)⟩.

(6)

The stochastic increments dNα,l (t) obey a Poisson point process with mean dNα,l (t) = 2 p̃α,l (t)dt [75]. For the case of equal
loss and gain rates, γ = γ− = γ+ , the rate of jumps per lattice
site is constant in time and given by
L
L
2 XX
1 X X dNα,l
=
p̃α,l (t) = γ,
L α=± l=1 dt
L α=± l=1

(7)

leading to an exponential distribution of waiting times between jumps. To integrate Eq. (3) numerically, we employ a
higher-order quantum jump algorithm [79]. In this algorithm,
waiting times are sampled from the exponential distribution,

7
and the type of jump that occurs is chosen randomly according
to the normalized probabilities given by
p−,l (t) = ⟨n̂l (t)⟩ /L,

p+,l (t) = (1 − ⟨n̂l (t)⟩)/L.

(8)

Between jumps, the system undergoes unitary time evolution
described by the Hamiltonian Ĥ.
The occupation of a quantum dot can be measured through
a modification of the above setup: instead of tunneling between the dot and reservoirs, we now consider direct tunneling from the source to the drain, with the tunneling amplitude proportional to the occupation number of the quantum
dot [75, 80]. Then, as described in Appendix A, the detection
of fermions in the drain indirectly signals that also the quantum dot is occupied. In the resulting stochastic Schrödinger
equation for the extended lattice system shown in Fig. 1(b),
there is only a single type of jump operator at each site,
L̂l =

√

γn̂l .

(9)

The rate of jumps per lattice site depends on the number of
particles N,
L

1 X dNl 2γN
=
,
L l=1 dt
L

(10)

and, given a jump occurs at time t, the lattice site l at which
the jump operator Eq. (9) is applied is chosen with probability
pl (t) = ⟨n̂l (t)⟩/N.

(11)

The key difference between fermion counting and occupation measurements is the conservation of the number of particles in the latter case. For fermion counting, each quantum
jump decreases or increases the number of particles by one.
Nevertheless, a meaningful quantitative comparison between
the two models is enabled by choosing parameters such that
the mean number of particles in the steady state and the rate
of quantum jumps are the same. This is achieved by setting
γ = γ− = γ+ and choosing the initial state as
|ψ0 ⟩ =

L/2
Y
l=1

ψ̂†2l−1 |0⟩,

(12)

which contains N = L/2 particles, corresponding to a fermion
density of n = N/L = 1/2. Then, according to Eqs. (7)
and (10), the rate of quantum jumps per lattice site is for both
models given by γ. While we have obtained all of our numerical results for n = 1/2, we will keep the explicit dependence
on n in analytical expressions.
In solving Eq. (3) numerically, a great simplification results
from the initial state, Eq. (12), being Gaussian and the dynamics generated by the quadratic Hamiltonian, Eq. (2), and
the jump operators in Eqs. (4) and (9) preserving this property. Gaussian states are fully determined by the L × L singleparticle density matrix
E
D
Dl,l′ (t) = ψ(t) ψ̂†l′ ψ̂l ψ(t) .
(13)

A quantum jump at lattice site m as described by Eq. (6) modifies the single-particle density matrix as
D
E
†
ψ(t) L̂α,m
ψ̂†l′ ψ̂l L̂α,m ψ(t)
E .
(14)
Dl,l′ (t + 0+ ) = D
†
ψ(t) L̂α,m
L̂α,m ψ(t)
By using Wick’s theorem, the expectation values on the righthand side can be expressed in terms of Dl,l′ (t), which leads to
a closed algorithm for the stochastic dynamics of the singleparticle density matrix.
The stochastic Schrödinger equation (3) describes the evolution of the state vector |ψ(t)⟩, conditioned on a sequence of
measurement outcomes. Averaging over the stochastic increments dN±,l (t) yields a quantum master equation in Lindblad
form that describes the unconditional evolution of the density matrix ρ̂(t) = |ψ(t)⟩⟨ψ(t)|. In the unconditional dynamics,
occupation measurements lead to dephasing between lattice
sites, which in turn induces heating to infinite temperature in
the steady state, ρ̂ss = P̂N / tr(P̂N ), where P̂N is the projector on the subspace with N particles.
For fermion counting
QL 
γ+ −γ−
the steady state is ρ̂ss = l=1 1 + γ+ +γ− n̂l , which reduces to
ρ̂ss = 1/2L for our choice γ− = γ+ [81, 82]. As a consequence, the unconditional steady state is completely featureless for both models, irrespective of the value of the jump rate
γ. Consequently, observables that are linear in the state, such
D
E


as expectation values Â(t) = tr Âρ̂(t) , do not exhibit any
nontrivial effects of continuous monitoring. To see such effects, it is necessary to consider observables that are nonlinear
in the projector on the conditional state ρ̂(t) = |ψ(t)⟩⟨ψ(t)|.
B.

Interpretation as random generalized measurements

An alternative description of the dynamics under continuous monitoring that is equivalent to the stochastic Schrödinger
equation (3) can be given by using the framework of generalized measurements introduced in Sec. I. Specifically, we consider unitary dynamics generated by the Hamiltonian Eq. (2),
interspersed with generalized measurements. The times at
which measurements are performed and the measurement operators have to be chosen such that the effect of measurements
on the quantum state described by Eq. (1) and the statistics of
measurement times and outcomes reproduce the corresponding properties of quantum jumps in quantum trajectories described by the stochastic Schrödinger equation (3).
As explained above, jumps occur at the rate γ per lattice
site. Therefore, the number of jumps during the evolution
from time t0 to t obeys a Poisson distribution with mean γLT
where T = t − t0 , and the times of individual jumps are distributed uniformly within the interval [t0 , t]. We choose the
times at which measurements are performed accordingly.
Monitored loss and gain or fermion counting, as described
by the jump operators in Eq. (4), corresponds to generalized
measurements with the measurement operators
1
M̂−,l = √ ψ̂l ,
L

1
†
M̂+,l = M̂−,l
= √ ψ̂†l .
L

(15)

8
symmetric simple exclusion process

K

100

10−1

γ/J
0.4
0.8
2.0
4.0
20.0
10−2

α≈

100

10−1

101

νt
(b)

(c)

e−2γt

100

100

e−2νt

10−1
10−1

(16)

PL
These operators obey the completeness relation l=1
M̂l† M̂l =
N̂/N = 1, where the last equality holds in the restriction to
the relevant
subspace in which the particle number operator
PL
N̂ = l=1
n̂l reduces to the number N. Again, the measurement operators are proportional to the corresponding jump
operators, implying that they induce
the
D
E same change of the
state, and the probabilities pl = M̂l† M̂l of different measurement outcomes agree with the corresponding probabilities of
the quantum jumps in Eq. (11).
Note that in the reformulation of quantum jumps as generalized measurements, the lattice site index l is the outcome of
a generalized measurement and, therefore, determined by the
quantum state, and only the measurement times are imposed
externally. In contrast, in the model considered in Ref. [41],
both the measurement times and the lattice sites at which projective measurements of occupation numbers are performed
are chosen independently from the state of the system. The
measurement operators for such local projective measurements as illustrated in Fig. 1(c) are M̂0,l = 1 − n̂l and M̂1,l = n̂l ,
and obey the local completeness relation M̂0,l + M̂1,l = 1, reflecting that the measurement operators are projectors.
The physical difference between the generalized measurements of occupation numbers described by Eq. (16) and projective measurements is best understood by considering a single particle on a lattice in a state |ψ⟩. Generalized occupation measurements amount to asking: “Where is the particle?” The answer is a particular lattice site l, with probability
pl = ⟨ψ|n̂l |ψ⟩. In contrast, performing a projective measurement of n̂l at a given lattice site l means asking the question:
“Is the particle at this site?” The answer is yes or know, with
probabilities p1 = ⟨ψ|n̂l |ψ⟩ and p0 = 1 − p1 , respectively.
The fact that the lattice site l is the outcome of the measurement is crucial for generalized measurements of occupation
numbers, for which the distribution of lattice sites in Eq. (11)
is not uniform in space. In contrast, for fermion counting
with probabilities given in Eq. (8), the marginal distribution
pl (t) = p−,l (t) + p+,l (t) = 1/L is uniform.
We finish this discussion by noting that any generalized
measurement on a given system can be implemented by coupling the system to auxiliary systems through unitary opera-

0.5
8

Q

1
M̂l = √ n̂l .
N

(a)

K

These measurement operators differ from the corresponding jump operators in Eq. (4) only through prefactors, which are chosen to obey the completeness relation
P
PL
†
α=± l=1 M̂α,l M̂α,l = 1. This implies that the effect of generalized measurements and quantum jumps on the state, described by Eqs. (1) and (6), respectively,
are
D †
E the same. Furthermore, the probabilities pα,l = M̂α,l
M̂α,l of different measurement outcomes agree with the corresponding probabilities
of the quantum jumps in Eq. (8).
The reformulation of quantum trajectory dynamics with the
jump operators in Eq. (9) as generalized measurements of
occupation numbers relies on the fact that the dynamics are
restricted to a subspace with a fixed number of particles N,
which allows us to choose the measurement operators as

10−2
10−2
0.0

0.5

1.0
γt

1.5

2.0

0

1

2

3

νt

Figure 3. (a) Density autocorrelation function, Eq. (17), for occupation measurements. For γ ≫ J, the dynamics agree with a symmetric
simple exclusion process. The Zeno effect is manifest in the collapse
of the data after rescaling time with ν = J 2 /γ. Particle-number conservation causes algebraic decay K(t) ∼ t−α with α ≈ 0.58. (b) For
fermion counting, the density autocorrelation function exhibits fast
exponential decay, described by a random telegraph process. (c) The
generalized Zeno effect is revealed by factoring out the telegraph process in Eq. (18). We observe a collapse of the telegraph-reduced
autocorrelation function after rescaling time with ν. For the results
shown in this figure, L = 100; in (a), the number of trajectories
ranges from Ntraj = 104 to Ntraj = 103 for γ = 0.4J to γ = 20J, and
Ntraj = 106 for the symmetric simple exclusion process; in (b) and
(c), Ntraj = 5 × 105 to Ntraj = 5 × 104 for γ = 0.4J to γ = 20J.

tions and performing a projective measurement on the auxiliary systems [71]. We describe how this is achieved for
the measurement operators in Eqs. (15) and (16) in Appendix B. The proposed implementations utilize operations
that are available on programmable quantum simulators of
fermionic circuits [83–91].

IV.

Generalized Zeno effect in the frequent-measurement limit

While frequent generalized measurements of occupation
numbers induce the conventional quantum Zeno effect,
fermion counting at high rates leads to a generalized Zeno effect. Importantly, both types of Zeno effects can be observed
in the density autocorrelation function.
The simplest manifestation of the conventional quantum
Zeno effect occurs in projective measurements: a single projective measurement causes the state of a quantum system to
collapse to an eigenstate of the measured observable. Due to
this initial collapse, repeated measurements yield the same result. If measurements are repeated at rate γ and in between

9
measurements there is coherent evolution with a characteristic frequency J, then transitions to other eigenstates of the
measured observable occur at the perturbatively small rate
ν = J 2 /γ—this suppression of coherently induced transitions
is the essence of the Zeno effect.
Generalized measurements of local occupation numbers are
not projective measurements. However, the measurement operators Eq. (16) are proportional to the projection operators n̂l
and therefore, repeated measurements still induce a quantum
Zeno effect. Suppose the system is prepared in a superposition
of pointer states, in other words eigenstates of the measurement operators, which are classical configurations of N particles on L lattice sites. Then, repeated measurements gradually collapse this superposition to a single pointer state, randomly chosen according to Born’s rule. The pointer states are
thus fixed points of the measurement-only dynamics. Coherent hopping destabilizes these fixed points. However, they remain metastable on a time scale ∼ 1/ν [92]. Since the pointer
states are classical configurations, signatures of the Zeno effect induced by generalized measurements of local occupation
numbers are both emergent classicality and the suppression of
coherent dynamics. This is formalized in the mapping to the
symmetric simple exclusion process [92–94].
The symmetric simple exclusion process is a classical
stochastic process of N particles on a 1D lattice of size L. On
each lattice site, there is at most one particle—in the present
context, this is a consequence of the Pauli exclusion principle. Each particle has its own internal timer and waits for a
random duration, drawn from an exponential distribution with
a mean waiting time that is identical for all particles. After
the waiting time has elapsed for a given particle, the particle
attempts a jump. The process being symmetric means that the
probabilities to jump to the left and to the right are the same;
for a simple process, jumps are only to neighboring sites. If
the target site is empty, the particle jumps there; otherwise, the
particle stays at its current location. In both cases, the timer
of the particle is restarted, and the particle waits for a random
time before it attempts the next jump.
To observe emergent classicality and the suppression of coherent dynamics as described above, we consider the average over trajectories of the conditional density autocorrelation
function in the steady state, which we define as
h
i
K(t − t′ ) = 4 ⟨n̂l (t)⟩ ⟨n̂l (t′ )⟩ − ⟨n̂l (t)⟩ ⟨n̂l (t′ )⟩ = zl (t)zl (t′ ).
(17)
In preparation for our discussion of the generalized Zeno effect below, we have introduced an alternative representation
of the density autocorrelation function in terms of the variables zl (t) = 2⟨n̂l (t)⟩ − 1, such that an occupied or empty site
corresponds to zl (t) = +1 or zl (t) = −1, respectively, and we
consider a system with average density ⟨n̂l (t)⟩ = 1/2.
Figure 3(a) shows the density autocorrelation function for
generalized measurements of occupation numbers for a system of size L = 100. For large values of γ, the data agree well
with numerical simulations of the symmetric simple exclusion
process [95] with a jump rate of 2ν where ν = J 2 /γ. In particular, the initial value K(0) approaches 1, which reflects that
individual trajectories become dominated by pointer states,

in other words classical configurations with zl (t) = ±1. The
suppression of coherent dynamics is demonstrated by the collapse of the data after rescaling time with ν = J 2 /γ. Finally,
particle-number conservation results in slow algebraic decay,
K(t) ∼ t−α . A fit to the data for γ = 20J yields α ≈ 0.58, in
reasonable agreement with the diffusive scaling with α = 1/2
expected in larger systems [96]. To observe this slow decay,
it is necessary to sample rare configurations with a strongly
inhomogeneous distribution of particles, which require long
times t ∼ O(L) to relax and contribute significantly to the algebraic tail of K(t). Therefore, to obtain the data shown in
Fig. 3(a), we have initialized each trajectory in a randomly
chosen classical configuration with N = L/2 particles.
Monitored loss and gain or fermion counting can induce a
generalized Zeno effect. As for the case of generalized measurements of occupation numbers, repeated application of the
measurement operators in Eq. (15) causes an initial superposition to collapse to a pointer state. However, the measurement
operators in Eq. (15) are not proportional to projection operators. Therefore, these operators do not stabilize pointer states,
but rather induce transitions between pointer states. In spite
of this qualitative difference, the dynamics in the frequentmeasurement limit are again characterized by emergent classicality and the suppression of coherent evolution.
Figure 3(b) shows the density autocorrelation function for
fermion counting. Again, K(0) → 1 for increasing γ signals
that the dynamics are dominated by classical configurations.
Indeed, for γ = 20J, we observe good agreement with exponential decay with a rate of 2γ, corresponding to a classical
random telegraph process [77]. That is, the occupation of each
lattice site fluctuates between zero and one at a rate ∼ γ, akin
to the signal produced by a telegraph. In stark contrast to the
case of occupation measurements, here the measurement-only
dynamics do not cause the evolution to freeze but rather to accelerate. To reveal the concomitant suppression of coherent
dynamics, we consider the decay of density autocorrelations
after factoring out the fast local telegraph process. This factorization can be achieved by noting that for a single realization
of the telegraph process on a lattice site l, the density auto′
correlation function can be written as zl (t)zl (t′ ) = (−1)Nl (t,t ) ,
where Nl (t, t′ ) is the fermion count at site l integrated from
time t′ to t. Put differently, each fermion count increases
Nl (t, t′ ) by one and switches the sign of zl (t). Factoring out this
classical contribution, we define the telegraph-reduced autocorrelation function as
Q(t − t′ ) = zl (t) (−1)Nl (t,t ) zl (t′ ).
′

(18)

By construction, Q(t) = 1 stays constant for measurementonly dynamics with J = 0. In contrast, a nonzero hopping
amplitude causes Q(t) to decay, with the decay rate providing
a direct measure for the suppression of coherent dynamics for
large values of γ. Indeed, a perturbative calculation presented
in Appendix C and valid for J ≪ γ yields exponential decay,
Q(t) = e−2νt , with a decay rate ν = J 2 /γ that vanishes for
γ → ∞. We interpret this slowdown of coherent dynamics
for high fermion count rates as a generalized quantum Zeno
effect. The exponential rather than algebraic decay is due to
the number of particles not being conserved.

10
Figure 3(c) shows numerical results for the telegraphreduced autocorrelation function Q(t). To demonstrate the
suppression of coherent dynamics, we rescale time with ν =
J 2 /γ. For increasing γ, the data agree with the analytically
predicted behavior.
To reveal the generalized Zeno effect, in Eq. (18), we had to
factor out the local telegraph process for each single trajectory
before taking the average over trajectories. This indicates that
the generalized Zeno effect is unique to conditional dynamics
under continuous monitoring, and that the suppression of coherent dynamics with an emergent slow decay rate ν = J 2 /γ
cannot be seen in the unconditional dynamics. To provide supporting evidence for this conjecture, we consider the density
autocorrelation function defined by
C0 (t − t′ ) =

1
⟨{n̂l (t), n̂l (t′ )}⟩ − ⟨n̂l (t)⟩ ⟨n̂l (t′ )⟩.
2

(19)

Here, unconditional two-time averages are determined by the
quantum regression theorem [72]. For example, for t > t′ > t0 ,
h
i
′
′
⟨n̂l (t)n̂l (t′ )⟩ = tr n̂l eL(t−t ) n̂l eL(t −t0 ) ρ̂0 ,

(20)

where ρ̂0 = |ψ0 ⟩⟨ψ0 | is the projector on the initial state, and
the Liouvillian L is defined by
L 
o
n †
h
i XX
†
L̂α,l , ρ̂ .
Lρ̂ = −i Ĥ, ρ̂ +
2L̂α,l ρ̂L̂α,l
− L̂α,l

(21)

α=± l=1

The sum over α is absent for occupation measurements, which
are described by a single type of jump operators. Let us anticipate that within the framework of replica Keldysh field theory
introduced next, we find the unconditional density autocorrelation function for occupation measurements to be given by
C0 (t) ∼

1
.
√
8 πν |t|

(22)

That is, we find slow, diffusive decay with a diffusion constant
∼ ν, also in the unconditional dynamics. For fermion counting, the Liouvillian, Eq. (21), is quadratic and the unconditional autocorrelation function can be calculated exactly by elementary means. The exact result is reproduced by the replica
Keldysh field theory approach introduced below, which yields
C0 (t) =

1 −2γ|t|
e−2γ|t|
e
J0 (2J |t|)2 ∼
sin(2J |t| + π/4)2 ,
4
4πJ |t|

(23)

where J0 is the Bessel function of the first kind and the asymptotic form applies to |t| → ∞. As for the conditional density correlation function Eq. (17), we obtain exponential decay
with a rate of 2γ, and there is no indication of a suppression
of coherent dynamics for γ ≫ J.
Having established the suppression of coherent dynamics
and emergent classicality in the conditional time evolution as
common traits of the conventional and generalized Zeno effects, we now turn to the question of how these properties are
reflected in correlations and entanglement in the steady state.

V.

Replica Keldysh field theory

In Sec. III, we have introduced two equivalent ways to describe the dynamics generated by continuous monitoring: in
terms of a stochastic Schrödinger equation, and as random
generalized measurements. We now focus on the latter formulation, which is a suitable starting point for making analytical progress using replica Keldysh field theory. To that end,
we generalize the formalism introduced for projective measurements in Ref. [41] to the generalized measurements. Our
presentation closely follows Ref. [41], but we highlight new
aspects that are specific to our models.
Recently, it has been pointed out that the long-wavelength
effective field theory derived in Ref. [41] is modified if the
Hamiltonian has particle-hole symmetry (PHS) [51]. This is
the case, in particular, for the 1D lattice Hamiltonian, Eq. (2),
considered in Ref. [41] and our work: Through a gauge transformation, ψ̂l 7→ il ψ̂l , the hopping amplitudes can be made
purely imaginary; after this transformation, the hopping ma⊺
trix, Eq. (41) below, obeys the PHS H = −H . The PHS can
be broken, for example, by adding next-nearest-neighbor hopping with real amplitudes. Crucially, the modifications of the
field theory due to PHS do not lead to qualitatively different
behavior. Therefore, we will present the theory first for the
technically simpler case of broken PHS, and we will summarize changes due to PHS in the end [53].
We anticipate that considering generalized measurements
described by Eqs. (15) and (16) instead of projective measurements of occupation numbers as in Ref. [41] results in
a number of important conceptual, technical, and, ultimately,
physical differences: (i) We have to account for the lattice
site l being an outcome of a generalized measurement rather
than selected randomly as for the projective measurements in
Ref. [41]. (ii) The modified forms of interaction vertices in
the measurement action necessitate a novel perturbative approach to preserve the causality structure of Keldysh field theory. (iii) The breaking of particle-number conservation due to
monitored loss and gain or fermion counting is reflected in
explicitly broken symmetries of the Keldysh action. We have
already discussed the physical consequences of these broken
symmetries in Sec. II. Below, we describe how they affect the
long-wavelength effective field theory.

A.

Observables

As explained in Sec. III A, the unconditional steady state is
completely featureless for both fermion counting and generalized occupation measurements for any value of the measurement rate γ. Therefore, to observe nontrivial effects of continuous monitoring, we have to consider observables that are
nonlinear in the state, such that the averaging over trajectories
does not simply amount to replacing the conditional by the
unconditional state. As an important example, we will study
here the von Neumann entanglement entropy. For a pure state
ρ̂ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ| and given a bipartition of the system into a subsystem A and its compliment B, the von Neumann entanglement

11
measurements M during the total evolution time T = t − t0
obeys a Poisson distribution with mean γLT ,

entropy of subsystem A reads


S A = −tr ρ̂A ln(ρ̂A ) ,

(24)

where ρ̂A = trB (ρ̂) is the reduced density matrix of subsystem
A. For Gaussian states, the entanglement entropy is related to
the full counting statistics of the number of particles in subsystem A [97–101],
SA = 2

∞
X
k=1

ζ(2k)C A(2k) =

π2 (2) π4 (4)
C + CA + · · · ,
3 A
45

(25)

where ζ(k) denotes the Riemann zeta function and C A(k) is the
P
k-th cumulant of the subsystem particle number N̂A = l∈A n̂l .
In particular, the second cumulant is given by
C A(2) =



D E2 
N̂A − N̂A
.

(26)

The task at hand is, therefore, to calculate the average over
trajectories of polynomials of quantum expectation values,
which are taken in the pure conditional state. Since we are
considering a quantum many-body system, we wish to perform this calculation within the framework of nonequilibrium
quantum field theory. This will allow us to employ standard techniques to obtain an approximate solution in the longwavelength limit.

p M (T ) =

Replica trick

Rewriting nonlinear observables such as the second cumulant, Eq. (26), as functional integrals in the framework of
Keldysh field theory can be achieved by introducing copies
or replicas of the system in two steps. First, we note that the
average over trajectories of a product of k expectation values
can be reformulated as a single expectation value that contains
the average of k replicas of the density matrix. For example,
for two operators Â and B̂ we can write
D

ED
E
h
i h
i
Â(t) B̂(t) = tr Âρ̂(t) tr B̂ρ̂(t)
n

o
= tr Â1 ⊗ B̂2 ρ̂1 (t) ⊗ ρ̂2 (t) .

µ̂k (t) =

k
O

ρ̂r (t).

X

p{αm ,lm } ({tm })

k
O

{αm ,lm ,tm }

ρ̂r (t),

(30)

r=1

where the symbolic sum includes the average over both the
Poisson distribution of the number of measurements M and
the uniform distributions of measurement times {tm }, as well
as a summation over measurement outcomes {αm , lm },
X

=

∞
X

p M (T )

M X X
L Z t
Y
dtm
m=1 αm =± lm =1

M=0

t0

T

.

(31)

The probability p{αm ,lm } ({tm }) of a sequence of measurement
results {αm , lm } can be expressed in terms of the nonnormalized density matrix for a single copy of the system. If we omit
the normalization factor in Eq. (1), the state of the system after
a time t can be written as
D̂(t) = V̂(t)ρ̂0 V̂(t)† ,

(32)

with the initial state ρ̂0 = |ψ0 ⟩⟨ψ0 | and
V̂(t) = Û(t − t M ) M̂αM ,lM Û(t M − t M−1 ) · · · M̂α1 ,l1 Û(t1 − t0 ). (33)

(27)

In the last equality, we have introduced the replica index
r ∈ {1, 2} to indicate on which copy of the system a particular
operator is acting [102]. Generalizing Eq. (27), a product of k
expectation values can be expressed in terms of the k-replica
density matrix
µ̂k (t) =

(29)

Second, for each measurement labeled by m ∈ {1, . . . , M},
the average in Eq. (28) contains an average over the measurement time tm . The latter is uniformly distributed in the interval
tm ∈ [t0 , t] of length T = t − t0 . Third, for each measurement,
there is an average over measurement outcomes αm ∈ {+, −}
and lm ∈ {1, . . . , L}. The index αm , which distinguishes the
measurement operators in Eq. (15) for fermion counting, is
absent for generalized occupation measurements with a single
type of measurement operator given in Eq. (16). For measurements at times {tm }, we denote the probability to obtain a
sequence of measurement outcomes {αm , lm } by p{αm ,lm } ({tm }).
The average in Eq. (28) is thus

{αm ,lm ,tm }

B.

1
(γLT ) M e−γLT .
M!

(28)

r=1

In the formulation of our models in terms of random generalized measurements, the average over trajectories comprises
three components: First, an average over the total number of
measurements M. As explained in Sec. III B, the number of

In V̂(t), unitary evolution Û(t) = e−iĤt is interspersed with
quantum jumps M̂αm ,lm at times tm . We leave the dependence
of V̂(t) on the sequence of measurement outcomes and times
{αm , lm , tm } implicit. The normalized density matrix is obtained by reinstating the factors pαm ,lm (t) in Eq. (1),
1
D̂(t).
m=1 pαm ,lm (tm )

ρ̂(t) = Q M

(34)

Finally, using that tr(ρ̂(t)) = 1, we obtain the probability of
the entire sequence of measurement outcomes, p{αm ,lm } ({tm }),
given by the product of probabilities of individual measurement outcomes, pαm ,lm (tm ), as
p{αm ,lm } ({tm }) =

M
Y
m=1

h
i
pαm ,lm (tm ) = tr D̂(t) .

(35)

12
Recall the discussion in Sec. III B that treating generalized occupation measurements requires us to consider the site indices
lm as measurement outcomes. Their distribution is contained
in the factors pαm ,lm (tm ). In contrast, the projective measurements studied in Ref. [41] are assumed to be distributed uniformly in space, an the uniform probability 1/L is combined
with the summation over lm in Eq. (31). Inserting the above
expression for p{αm ,lm } ({tm }) in Eq. (30), we obtain
 k
,
X O
 h
ik−1


µ̂k (t) =
.
(36)
D̂r (t) tr D̂(t)
{αm ,lm ,tm }

r=1

{αm ,lm ,tm }

r=1

We note that the replica limit R → 1, which is required to
reproduce the probability according to Born’s rule given in
Eq. (35), is different from the usual replica limit R → 0 in the
theory of disordered systems.
We can now obtain averages over trajectories of nonlinear
observables such as the cumulant, Eq. (26), by calculating
expectation values that are linear in the nonnormalized density matrix of R replicas of the original system and taking the
replica limit R → 1 in the end. Note that the way in which we
have introduced replicas in Eq. (27) allows us to obtain
D equalE
time correlations of conditional expectation values Â(t) and
D
E
B̂(t) . However, unconditional averages, such as the autocorrelation function, Eq. (19), can also be obtained for operators
Â(t) and B̂(t′ ) at different times t , t′ . A convenient way to
generate different forms of expectation values is by introducing source terms in the R-replica Keldysh partition function,
 R

X
O


ZR (t) =
tr
D̂r (t) .
(38)
{αm ,lm ,tm }

r=1

By construction, the R-replica Keldysh partition function is
normalized such that ZR (t) → 1 for R → 1. We proceed
to derive a functional integral representation of ZR (t), where
source fields can be introduced as required at a later stage.
C.

ZR (t) =

Z

D[ψ∗ , ψ] eiψ G0 ψ
†

×

−1

R
X Y
{αm ,lm ,tm } r=1

The denominator in Eq. (36) obstructs the application of the
usual Keldysh construction to obtain a functional integral representation of the time evolution of the k-replica density matrix. We can get rid of this denominator by using the replica
trick, which amounts here to first introducing additional replicas with indices r ∈ {k + 1, . . . , R} and then taking the replica
limit R → 1 [6, 20, 41, 44]:

 R
X

O

µ̂k (t) = lim
trr=k+1,...,R 
D̂r (t) .
(37)
R→1

Eq. (32), is visualized as proceeding along two branches, the
forward branch described by V̂(t) acting on ρ̂0 from the left,
and the backward branch described by V̂(t)† acting on ρ̂0 from
the right. Replacing operators on the forward and backward
branches by fields with Keldysh indices k = + and k = −,
respectively, we obtain

Replica Keldysh action

In Keldysh field theory [103–106], the R-replica Keldysh
partition function, Eq. (38), is expressed as a functional integral over two independent sets of Grassmann fields ψk,r,l (t)
and ψ∗k,r,l (t) with Keldysh index k and replica index r, which
we collect into 2R-component vectors denoted by ψl (t) and
ψ∗l (t). Time evolution of the nonnormalized density matrix,

†
M+,r,αm ,lm (tm )M−,r,α
(tm ). (39)
m ,lm

We omit the matrix element of the initial state ρ̂0 , which fixes
the number of particles for occupation measurements but is
otherwise irrelevant in the steady state. The latter can be described by taking the limit t0 → −∞. Unitary evolution contained in V̂(t), Eq. (33), gives rise to the quadratic Keldysh
action, where we use a shorthand notation leaving the integration over time and summation over lattice sites implicit,
ψ†G−1
0 ψ=

Z t
t0

dt′

L
X

′
ψ∗l (t′ )G−1
0,l,l′ ψl′ (t ).

(40)

l,l′ =1

The inverse Green’s function reads G−1
0 = (i∂t − H) σz , where
σz is a Pauli matrix in Keldysh space and the matrix H describes hopping according to Eq. (2),

Hl,l′ = −J δl+1,l′ + δl,l′ +1 .

(41)

To further simplify the notation, we have omitted the identity 1R in replica space in the definition of the inverse Green’s
function. In the limit t0 → −∞, the Green’s function should
be augmented by an infinitesimal regularization term, fixing
the correct causality properties and particle number [41]. We
omit this term, anticipating that the Green’s function will be
dressed due to measurements.
According to the rule formulated above for replacing operators by fields, the measurement operators for monitored loss
and gain or fermion counting, Eq. (15), are represented by
1
†
M±,r,−,l (t) = M±,r,+,l
(t) = ± √ ψ±,r,l (t),
L
1
†
M±,r,+,l (t) = M±,r,−,l
(t) = ± √ ψ∗±,r,l (t),
L

(42)

where we include the minus sign acquired by Grassmann
fields on the backward branch [106]. For the measurement
operators describing generalized measurements of occupation
numbers, Eq. (16), we obtain
1
†
M±,r,l (t) = M±,r,l
(t) = √ ψ∗±,r,l (t)ψ±,r,l (t).
N

(43)

Inserting the explicit expression, Eq. (31), for the average
over the number of measurements as well as the measurement
times and outcomes in the functional integral representation of
the R-replica Keldysh partition function in Eq. (39), we find

13
that each factor in the product over measurements labeled by
m is identical. We may thus omit the label m to obtain
ZR (t) =

Z

D[ψ∗ , ψ] eiψ G0 ψ
†

−1

∞
X
e−γLT
M=0

⟨Gl (t)⟩ = −

M!
M

 . (44)
−,r,α,l (t)


L Z t
R
Y
 X X
M+,r,α,l (t)M †
dt
× γL
α=± l=1

t0

r=1

When we now perform the sum over the number of measurements M, the expression in the second
R line of Eq. ∗(44) is exponentiated. This leads to ZR (t) = D[ψ∗ , ψ]eiS [ψ ,ψ] , where
the action reads
S [ψ∗ , ψ] =

Z t
t0

dt′

L
X

ψ∗l G−1
0,l,l′ ψl′ + γ

Z

d2 x L M [ψ∗l , ψl ].

l,l′ =1

(45)
Here and occasionally in the following, we abbreviate expressions by omitting field indices and time arguments. Furthermore,
we abbreviate integration over space and time as
R
PL R t ′
d2 x = l=1
dt . The Lagrangian density due to random
t0
generalized measurements reads
iL M [ψ∗ , ψ] =

R
1 XY

LR−1 α=± r=1

Vα [ψ∗r , ψr ] − 1,

(46)

where the prefactor L1−R vanishes in the replica limit and will
be omitted in the following. The last term in the measurement
Lagrangian stemsR from the factor e−γLT in Eq. (44), where we
have used LT = d2 x 1. For fermion counting, the vertices in
the measurement Lagrangian are given by
V− [ψ∗ , ψ] = −ψ+ ψ∗− ,

V+ [ψ∗ , ψ] = −ψ∗+ ψ− .

(47)

The product over replicas in Eq. (46) thus yields an interaction
vertex containing 2R fermionic fields. For occupation measurements, there is a single vertex that depends explicitly on
the fermion density n = N/L,
V[ψ∗ , ψ] =

Specifically, we want ⟨Gl (t)⟩ to represent the fermionic
Green’s function at equal positions and in the symmetrized
limit of equal time arguments of the fields ψl (t) and ψ∗l (t),

1 ∗
ψ ψ+ ψ∗− ψ− .
n +

(48)

In this case, the product over replicas in Eq. (46) yields an
interaction vertex containing 4R fermionic fields.
The replica Keldysh construction we have presented above
provides an exact reformulation of the dynamics under continuous monitoring as a field theory. To make further progress,
we now have to introduce suitable approximations. The first
step is to identify the relevant degrees of freedom, which dominate correlations and—via Eq. (25)—the dynamics of entanglement at long wavelengths. For generalized measurements of occupation numbers, we expect that the relevant slow
modes are the same as for the case of projective measurements, that is, fermionic bilinears which we collect in the matrix Gl (t) = −iψl (t)ψ∗l (t) [41]. As we will see comparing with
our numerical results, this turns out to be the correct choice
also for fermion counting.

E D
E
i D
ψl (t)ψ∗l (t + 0+ ) + ψl (t)ψ∗l (t − 0+ ) . (49)
2

Two technical issues arise: (i) in the construction of the
Keldysh field integral, which is based on a discretization of
time, products of field operators n̂l = ψ̂†l ψ̂l as occur in the measurement operators for occupation measurements in Eq. (16)
are replaced by fields that are a discrete time step apart; (ii) the
discrete-time Green’s function at equal discrete times differs
from the symmetrized limit of equal time arguments in the
continuous-time formulation [104], and we want ⟨Gl (t)⟩ to
represent the latter. These discrepancies can be resolved by
using the regularization procedure detailed in Appendix D.
The measurement operators for fermion counting are linear in fermionic field operators. Therefore, in this case
the issues described above do not arise, and the vertices in
Eq. (47) are not affected by the regularization. After a LarkinOvchinnikov rotation [103, 104],
1
ψ1,2 = √ (ψ+ ± ψ− ) ,
2


1
ψ∗1,2 = √ ψ∗+ ∓ ψ∗− ,
2

(50)


1 ∗
ψ ψ1 − ψ∗2 ψ2 ∓ ψ∗1 ψ2 − ψ∗2 ψ1 .
2 1

(51)

these vertices take the form
V± [ψ∗ , ψ] = −

In contrast, we obtain a modified vertex for generalized measurements of occupation numbers through the regularization,
"
#
1 1 1 †
1 2ψ† σx ψ
∗
∗
∗
V[ψ , ψ] =
+ ψ σ x ψ − ψ1 ψ1 ψ2 ψ2 =
e
.
n 4 2
4n
(52)
Up to the prefactor 1/n, the regularized vertex is identical to
one of the regularized vertices for projective occupation measurements of Ref. [41].
The vertices in Eqs. (51) and (52) contain the term ψ∗2 ψ1 ,
which would correspond to an anti-Keldysh component of the
self-energy, and thus violates the familiar causality structure
of fermionic Keldysh field theory [104]. For fermion counting
and in the replica limit R → 1, this term cancels in the sum
over α in Eq. (46). A similar cancellation occurs for projective
measurements of occupation numbers [41]. However, this is
not the case for generalized occupation measurements. In Appendix D, we discuss how the appearance of an anti-Keldysh
component can be reconciled with the normalization of the
Keldysh partition function in the replica limit, ZR (t) → 1 for
R → 1. The violation of the usual causality structure is only
due to the part of the Lagrangian for occupation measurements
that is quadratic in fermionic fields,
iL M,Q [ψ∗ , ψ] =

1

R 
X

22R−1 nR r=1


ψ∗1,r ψ2,r + ψ∗2,r ψ1,r ,

(53)

which we therefore separate from the nonquadratic part,
L M,NQ = L M − L M,Q . To preserve the usual structure of the

14
Keldysh formalism, we will treat L M,Q perturbatively, so that
the self-energy, which nonperturbatively dresses the Green’s
function, is fully determined by L M,NQ . For brevity, we will
drop the subscript NQ in the following.
With these precautions, we introduce Hermitian 2R × 2R
matrix fields G and Σ, corresponding to the equal-time
fermionic Green’s function and the self-energy, by means
of a generalized Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation [41].
Specifically, we include the factor
Z
ϵ
2
†
1=
D[G, Σ] e− 2 Tr(Σ )−i Tr(GΣ)−ψ Σψ
(54)
in the functional integral over ψ and ψ∗ . The trace Tr( · ) acts
in Keldysh, replica, lattice, and time spaces, with the matrices
G and Σ being diagonal in lattice and time spaces. Convergence of the integration over G and Σ is ensured by the term
proportional to ϵ. We omit this term in the following, with the
understanding that the limit ϵ → 0 has to be taken at the end
of the calculation. In this limit, the integral over Σ reduces
to a delta functional fixing G = −iψψ† [41]. Using this relation, decoupling the measurement Lagrangian simultaneously
in all possible slow channels is achieved by taking the average of L M with respect to the Gaussian action ψ† G−1 ψ [41].
For fermion counting, this is done most conveniently with the
form of the vertices given in Eq. (47), and the result can be
expressed as a trace trK in Keldysh space and a determinant
detR in replica space,
X
iL M [G] =
detR [trK (τα G)] − 1,
(55)
α=±

where τ± = (iσz ±σy )/2 and σi are the Pauli matrices. The Lagrangian for occupation measurements contains a determinant
det( · ) and a trace tr( · ) in both Keldysh and replica spaces,
!
1
i
1
iL M [G] = R det − iσ x G + 2R−1 R tr(σ x G) − 1. (56)
n
2
2
n
This form of the measurement Lagrangian is similar to the one
for projective measurements [41]: the latter does not contain
the prefactor 1/nR and the two types of projection operators,
n̂l and 1 − n̂l , result in two determinant contributions with opposite signs of the term containing G, in contrast to our model
with only one determinant term. The trace in Eq. (56) stems
from the subtraction of L M,Q , Eq. (53), and ensures that L M
does not contain terms that are linear in G.
After decoupling the measurement Lagrangian, the action
is quadratic in the fermionic fields ψ and ψ∗ , which can thus
be integrated out, leading to
Z
S [G, Σ] = S 0 [G, Σ] + γ d2 x L M [Gl ],
(57)
where
n h
o
i
iS 0 [G, Σ] = Tr ln G−1
0 + i (Σ + A) − iGΣ .

(58)

In the basis of fields introduced in the Larkin-Ovchinnikov
rotation in Eq. (50), the bare Green’s function is proportional

to the identity in both Keldysh and replica spaces, G−1
0 = i∂t −
H. The matrix A results from expressing the quadratic part of
the measurement action, Eq. (53), as
Z
(59)
iγ d2 x L M,Q [ψ∗l , ψl ] = −ψ† Aψ,
where A = 0 for fermion counting and, for occupation measurements,
γ
A = − 2R−1 R σ x .
2
n

(60)

As anticipated, we treat A ∼ γ perturbatively. To first order in
A, the action in Eq. (58) reads
h 

i
iS 0 [G, Σ] = Tr ln G−1 + i (GA − GΣ) ,
(61)
where the dressed Green’s function is given by
G−1 = G−1
0 + iΣ.
D.

(62)

Symmetries of the Keldysh action

The long-wavelength behavior of our models is dominated
by strong fluctuations of soft modes, which are related to symmetries of the Keldysh action. Therefore, a prerequisite for
deriving a long-wavelength effective field theory is to identify
the relevant symmetries. This analysis provides important insights into the consequences of particle-number conservation
for generalized occupation measurements. As explained at the
beginning of Sec. V, we consider here the case of broken PHS.
Modifications due to PHS will be discussed further below.
The fermionic replica Keldysh action in Eq. (45) is defined in terms of 2R-component vectors of Grassmann fields
ψ and ψ∗ . In the Larkin-Ovchinnikov basis, Eq. (50), the
bare Green’s function G0 is diagonal in Keldysh and replica
spaces, and, therefore, rotations of the fields described by
ψ 7→ Rψ and ψ† 7→ ψ† R−1 with R ∈ U(2R) leave the first
term in the action of Eq. (45), which encodes free evolution in
the absence of measurements, invariant. Which rotations are
symmetries of the full action including the measurement Lagrangian is most conveniently analyzed after performing the
generalized Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, meaning
for the action in Eq. (61) and the measurement Lagrangians
given in Eqs. (55) and (56) in terms of the matrix fields G and
Σ. Rotations of the fermionic fields act on the matrix fields as
G 7→ RGR−1 and Σ 7→ RΣR−1 . Interestingly, the measurement
Lagrangians have different symmetries for R = 1 and R > 1,
corresponding to the unconditional evolution of observables
that are linear in the system state and to the conditional evolution of nonlinear observables, respectively.
We consider first the case R = 1. Then, the measurement
Lagrangian for fermion counting, Eq. (55), reduces to
iL M [G] = i trK (σz G) − 1.

(63)

This Lagrangian and the action in Eq. (61), where A = 0 for
fermion counting, are invariant under phase rotations Rη =

15
eiη/2 and Rζ = eiζσz /2 , with η, ζ ∈ R. For occupation measurements, the Lagrangian Eq. (56) simplifies for R = 1 to
"
#
1 1
iL M [G] =
+ detK (G) − 1,
(64)
n 4
which is invariant under arbitrary rotations R ∈ U(2). However, the matrix A, Eq. (60), appearing in the action in Eq. (61)
is proportional to σ x , thus reducing the symmetries of the action to rotations of the form Rη and Rϕ = eiϕσx /2 . An inverse
Larkin-Ovchinnikov rotation, Eq. (50), shows that Rϕ corresponds to phase rotations with opposite signs on the forward
and backward branches of the Keldysh contour, which is the
quantum [105, 106] or strong symmetry [107, 108] that is associated with particle-number conservation.
We now turn to the case R > 1. Interestingly, there is now
an additional type of rotations, which is a symmetry of the action, Eq. (61), and the measurement Lagrangian for fermion
counting, Eq. (55), given by RΦ = eiΦσx /2 where Φ is a traceless R × R matrix, trR (Φ) = 0. Such rotations form the group
SU(R). We show that RΦ is a symmetry of Eq. (61) in Appendix E. For the case of occupation measurements, it follows
directly from inspection of Eqs. (56) and (61) with (60) that
rotations of the form RΦ are a symmetry.
It is informative to trace the symmetry of the Keldysh action under RΦ back to a symmetry of the time-evolved state of
R replicas of the original fermionic lattice system. As we discuss in detail in Appendix E, this symmetry is specific to noninteracting systems, for which coherent dynamics and measurements preserve the Gaussianity of the state. Furthermore,
as anticipated in Secs. I and II, there are two requirements
for the symmetry to occur: (i) The number of particles has
to be conserved by the coherent dynamics; measurements are
allowed to change the number of particles by integer values,
but they have to keep the system in a state with a well-defined
number of particles. This is the case, in particular, for the
measurement operators in Eqs. (15) and (16), which change
the number of particles by ∆N = ±1 and ∆N = 0, respectively. For the Majorana model of Ref. [44], this condition
is not met. (ii) The outcomes of all measurements have to
be recorded. The symmetry is broken, in particular, for inefficient detection, which is commonly modeled by averaging
over a fraction of the measurement outcomes [75].
These two conditions, combined with the symmetry under
permutations of replicas that is built into the formalism, imply
that the R-fold replicated state of the system is at all times a
Slater determinant with a well-defined number N of particles
in each replica,
|ψR,N ⟩ =

R Y
N X
L
Y
r=1 n=1 l=1

ψl,n ψ̂†r,l |0⟩.

(65)

Here, ψn are N orthonormal single-particle states with amplitude ψl,n on lattice site l. The fermionic field operators ψ̂r,l act
in the Hilbert space of R replicas of the original lattice system.
Furthermore, the R-replica vacuum state obeys ψ̂r,l |0⟩ = 0.
Due to the symmetry under permutations of replicas, each
single-particle state ψn is occupied in all replicas. Furthermore, fermionic statistics imply that each state ψn remains

fully occupied after a single-particle transformation that corresponds to a change of basis in replica space but not in the
Hilbert space of individual replicas. Therefore, each unitary
transformation that describes such a change of basis is a symmetry of the above Slater determinant. Such transformations
can be written as
R X
L
X
ĜΦ = eiΦ̂/2 ,
Φ̂ =
ψ̂†r,l Φr,r′ ψ̂r′ ,l ,
(66)
r,r′ =1 l=1

where Φ is a Hermitian R × R matrix. The detailed derivation
in Appendix E shows that ĜΦ is a symmetry of the R-replica
Slater determinant, Eq. (65), up to a phase factor that reduces
to unity for trR (Φ) = 0. We thus recover the symmetry group
SU(R). As we explain in Appendix E, this symmetry of the Rreplica state translates to a strong symmetry of the superoperator that describes the time evolution of the R-replica nonnormalized density matrix [107, 108], which in turn is reflected
in the symmetry of the Keldysh action under RΦ .
Having clarified the technical requirements for the SU(R)
symmetry to arise, let us finally provide a physical explanation in terms of conservation of the total number of particles.
We first note that according to the discussion below Eq. (64),
conservation of the number of particles in each of R replicas
is associated with the symmetry of the Keldysh action under
rotations of the form RΦ = eiΦσx /2 with Φr,r′ = δr,r0 δr′ ,r0 for
r0 ∈ {1, . . . , R}. Evidently, these rotations are not contained
in the symmetry group SU(R) characterized by trR (Φ) = 0.
This observation reaffirms that this symmetry does not require
particle-number conservation within the system and its replicas. However, it is interesting to note that the implementations
of fermion counting described in Appendices A and B require
coupling the fermionic lattice system to auxiliary reservoirs
in such a way that the total number of particles in the system and reservoirs is conserved. Indeed, the conservation of
matter in a closed system implies that the implementation of
any measurement that obeys condition (i) above requires coupling the system to reservoirs to compensate the change of the
number of particles in the system. Therefore, we can regard
conservation of the total number of particles as the physical
reason for the occurrence of the SU(R) symmetry. However,
an important caveat is formulated in condition (ii): Averaging
over measurement outcomes corresponds to a loss of information that is reflected in the state of the system becoming
mixed rather than pure as in Eq. (65). Then, as detailed in
Appendix E, the SU(R) symmetry is broken, even though the
total number of particles is still conserved.
E.

Saddle-point manifold

The field integral over G and Σ is dominated by the spatially homogeneous and time-independent saddle points of the
Keldysh action. Due to the symmetries of the Keldysh action
discussed in the previous section, there is, in fact, a manifold of saddle points. To establish the manifold, it is sufficient
to find one particular saddle point. The full manifold is then
obtained by applying all rotations that are symmetries of the
action to the particular saddle point.

16
We consider first the variation of the action with respect to
Σ, which yields the saddle-point equation
Z
Z π
1
dq ∞ dω
,
(67)
G=
−π 2π −∞ 2π ω − ξq + iΣ
where ξq = −2J cos(q) is the dispersion relation of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (2). We omit a contribution to the saddle point
of G that contains A. Since Σ ∼ γ at the saddle point as shown
below, such a contribution would lead to terms of second order in γ when we insert G in the action Eq. (61). In accordance
with Eq. (49), the integration over frequencies in Eq.
 (67) has
to be regularized by introducing a factor eiωt +e−iωt 2, where
the limit t → 0+ is taken after the integration. By writing
Σ = VλV−1 , where λ is a diagonal matrix, we thus find [41]
G = −iQ/2,

Q = sgn[Re(Σ)] = V sgn[Re(λ)] V . (68)
−1

Note that the matrix Q obeys the nonlinear constraint Q2 = 1.
To simplify the analysis of the saddle-point equation that
follows from the variation of the action with respect to G,
we use that—as explained above—to establish the full manifold of saddle points, it is sufficient to find one particular saddle point. We thus focus on replica-symmetric saddle points,
Q = Q0 ⊗ 1R . Equation (49) suggests that a particular solution
of the saddle-point equation for G is given by the symmetrized
equal-time limit of the Green’s function, which, as discussed
in Appendix D, is fully determined by fermionic anticommutation relations and the distribution function ⟨n̂l ⟩ss = n in the
steady state. This particular solution is obtained from Eq. (68)
by setting Σ ∝ Λ, leading to Q0 = Λ, where
!
1 2 (1 − 2n)
Λ=
.
(69)
0
−1
For n = 1/2, we thus find Λ = σz for fermion counting. The
variation of the action with respect to G can
 be obtained conveniently by inserting G = −i Q0 + δQG 2 in the measurement Lagrangian and performing an expansion in δQG as detailed in Appendix F. Accounting for the symmetries of the
Keldysh action discussed in Sec. V D, we then obtain the manifold of saddle points for fermion counting:
Σ = γQ/2R−1 ,

−1
Q = RΦ σz RΦ
.

(70)

The symmetries of the Keldysh action Rη and Rζ do not rotate the saddle point, and, therefore, do not further enlarge the
saddle-point manifold. Note that the relation between Σ and
Q is consistent with the definition of Q in Eq. (68). For occupation measurements, we find
Σ = γQ/(2n),

−1
Q = RΦ Rϕ ΛRϕ−1 RΦ
.

(71)

Here, we omit a shift of the saddle point that vanishes in the
replica limit R → 1 and is given explicitly in Appendix F.
Each particular saddle point in the manifold spontaneously
breaks the symmetries of the Keldysh action under RΦ and, for
occupation measurements, also Rϕ . This gives rise to Goldstone modes. The Goldstone mode associated with Rϕ leads to
the slow algebraic decay of the unconditional density autocorrelation function for occupation measurements, Eq. (22). In

contrast, for fermion counting, there are no Goldstone modes
in the replica limit R → 1 that describes the unconditional
dynamics—by definition, the traceless R × R matrix Φ reduces
to Φ = 0 in this case. The absence of Goldstone modes is
reflected in the exponential decay of the autocorrelation function in Eq. (23). However, as we discuss further below, the
Goldstone mode associated with RΦ is described by the same
long-wavelength effective theory for both fermion counting
and occupation measurements, leading to almost identical correlations and entanglement properties in the steady state.
VI.

Gaussian theory

Properly treating strong massless fluctuations within the
saddle-point manifold requires an RG analysis of the corresponding nonlinear sigma model. However, first important insights can be obtained from considering quadratic fluctuations
of G and Σ around a particular saddle point within the manifold. A convenient expansion point is given by Q = Λ, where
n = 1/2 such that Λ = σz for fermion counting. The Gaussian
approximation is controlled for γ ≪ J and valid up to intermediate length scales, where renormalization corrections are
small. We will go beyond the Gaussian approximation in the
next section, Sec. VII.
A.

Expansion in fluctuations

Arbitrary fluctuations around the saddle point Q = Λ can
be parametrized as


G = −i Λ + δQG 2,
Σ = γ (Λ + δQΣ ) (2n),
(72)
with Hermitian 2R×2R matrices δQG and δQΣ . For simplicity,
we set R = 1 in all numerical factors. Then, the expansion
point for Σ lies within the manifold for both fermion counting,
Eq. (70), and occupation measurements, Eq. (71), when we
set n = 1/2 for fermion counting. As detailed in Appendix F,
the Keldysh action vanishes to zeroth order in fluctuations,
and there are no contributions to first order for an expansion
around a saddle point. At second order, we find
Z
S (2) = S 0(2) + γ d2 x L(2)
(73)
M,
where [41]
iS 0(2) =

Z
1
d2 x d2 x′ Bl−l′ (t − t′ )
(4τ0 )2


× Tr δQΣ,l (t) (1 + Λ) δQΣ,l′ (t′ ) (1 − Λ)
Z


1
−
d2 x Tr δQΣ,l (t)δQG,l (t) , (74)
4τ0

with the mean free time τ0 = n/γ and the block of the diffusion ladder Bl−l′ (t − t′ ), which, in momentum and frequency
space, reads
n

 o−1/2
Bq (ω) = (iω − 1/τ0 )2 + 4J sin(q/2) 2
.
(75)

17
The expansion of the measurement Lagrangian is carried out
in Appendix F. There are in general two contributions,
(2,1)
(2,2)
L(2)
M = LM + LM .

(76)

For fermion counting, the first contribution contains the trace
of a square and the second contribution the square of a trace,

2 
2 
1
Tr σz δQG − σy δQG ,
16τ0
2

2 
1  
Tr
σ
δQ
−
Tr
σ
δQ
.
iγL(2,2)
=
z
G
y
G
M
16τ0

iγL(2,1)
=−
M

(77)

Similarly, for generalized occupation measurements we find
n
 o
1
Tr (Λ − σ x ) δQG 2 ,
32nτ0


1
Tr (Λ − σ x ) δQG 2 .
iγL(2,2)
=
M
32nτ0

iγL(2,1)
=−
M

(79)

Density correlations

We consider two types of connected density correlation
functions: the unconditional dynamics are described by
1
⟨{n̂l (t), n̂l′ (t′ )}⟩ − ⟨n̂l (t)⟩ ⟨n̂l′ (t′ )⟩,
2

(81)

which reduces to Eq. (19) for l = l′ , and equal-time correlations under conditional dynamics are captured by
Cl,l′ (t) =

1
⟨{n̂l (t), n̂l′ (t)}⟩ − ⟨n̂l (t)⟩ ⟨n̂l′ (t)⟩.
2

(82)

A unified description of both types of correlation functions
can be obtained in replica Keldysh field theory by considering
Cr,r′ ,l,l′ (t, t′ ) = δρr,l (t)δρr′ ,l′ (t′ ) ,

(83)

where r and r′ are replica indices and density fluctuations are
related to the fluctuation matrix δQG by [41]

1 
δρr,l (t) = − trK σ x δQG,r,r,l (t) .
4

Z

d2 x

R
X

ξr,l (t)δρr,l (t),

(87)

r=1

and, therefore, the theory splits into two sectors, ZR = ZR∥ ZR⊥ .
The replica-symmetric and replicon sectors describe, respectively, unconditional and conditional correlation functions.

C0,l,l′ (t, t′ ) =

(85)
(86)

Due to the symmetry under permutations of replicas, the result
does not depend on the choice of r , r′ . It is worthwhile to
recall that the formalism is constructed to enable the computation of conditional averages as in Eqs. (27) and (82) at equal
times. While Eq. (83) can be evaluated at arbitrary times t and
t′ , only t = t′ has a clear physical meaning for r , r′ .
The correlation function, Eq. (83), can be evaluated by introducing sources that couple to density fluctuations, that is,
by adding to the action a contribution
iS ξ = i

where, by construction, δQ∥ = (1/R) trR (δQ) and δQ⊥ = δQ −
δQ∥ ⊗ 1R . These modes are orthogonal,
h

i
trR δQ∥ ⊗ 1R δQ⊥ = 0,
(80)

B.

C0,l,l′ (t, t′ ) = Cr,r,l,l′ (t, t′ ),
Cl,l′ (t) = Cr,r,l,l′ (t, t) − Cr,r′ ,l,l′ (t, t).

(78)

At this point, it is useful to decompose the fluctuation matrices into longitudinal or replica-symmetric and transversal or
replicon modes according to
δQ = δQ∥ ⊗ 1R + δQ⊥ ,

In particular, replica-diagonal and replica-offdiagonal components determine the unconditional and conditional density correlation functions as

(84)

and taking derivatives with respect to the sources after performing the Gaussian integral over δQG and δQΣ . To that end,
an explicit parametrization of the Hermitian matrices δQG and
δQΣ has to be chosen. It is convenient to expand the fluctuation matrices in a basis of Pauli matrices in Keldysh space.
Replica-symmetric fluctuations δQ∥ are fully determined by
the scalar coefficients in this expansion. For replicon modes
δQ⊥ , the coefficients themselves are traceless Hermitian R × R
matrices, which can be parametrized by decomposing them
into their real and imaginary parts, taking into account the restrictions imposed by tracelessness and Hermiticity.
We consider correlations in the steady state, which are invariant under translations in both space and time, such that
C0,l,l′ (t, t′ ) = C0,l−l′ (t − t′ ), whereas Cl,l′ (t) = Cl−l′ becomes
independent of t. For fermion counting, we then find the unconditional correlation function
C0,l (t) =

1 −|t|/τ0
e
Jl (2J |t|)2 ,
4

(88)

which reduces to Eq. (23) for l = 0. By taking the derivative with respect to time of Eq. (81) and using the explicit
representation of two-time averages in Eq. (20), it is straightforward to check that this is, in fact, the exact result [81, 82].
For generalized occupation measurements, we obtain
2

e−l /(4ν|t|)
C0,l (t) ∼ n (1 − n) √
,
4πν |t|

(89)

with ν = 2nJ 2 /γ. This result is valid in the limit of large
distances l ≫ l0 , where the mean free path is given by
√
l0 = 2Jn/γ,
(90)
or at long times t ≫ τ0 . Equation (89) agrees with the corresponding result for random projective measurements obtained
in Ref. [41] when we set n = 1/2 in the expression for ν but
not in the prefactor of the correlation function. For l = 0
and n = 1/2, we recover Eq. (22). From the structure of the

18
measurement-induced interaction vertices, it follows that the
asymptotic behavior described by Eq. (89) obtained in Gaussian approximation is actually exact [41].
In contrast to the completely different unconditional correlation functions, Eqs. (88) and (89), we find the conditional
density correlation function in the steady state and for n = 1/2
to be identical for fermion counting and both generalized and
projective measurements of occupation numbers [41]. This
will be justified further in Sec. VII where, instead of considering arbitrary Gaussian fluctuations as in Eq. (72), we focus
on fluctuations of massless Goldstone modes, which obey the
same long-wavelength effective theory in all three models.
To calculate the conditional correlation function, one has to
take the boundary condition induced by stopping the measurement process at a finite time t into account [41]. For projective
measurements of occupation numbers, this leads to the correlation function in momentum space, Cq , being expressed in
terms of the solution of an integral equation that depends on
a single parameter, u = 2l0 sin(q/2). However, one obtains
approximately the same result for the correlation function by
omitting the boundary condition and instead rescaling u by a
factor of two, which yields [41]
Cq ≈ n (1 − n) c̃(ql0 ),

(91)

where
c̃(u) =

2
π

Z ∞
0

dv

2

Re[b(2u, v)] − |b(2u, v)|
,
1 − Re[b(2u, v)]

(92)

and
h
i−1/2
b(u, v) = (1 − iv)2 + 2u2
.

2n Re[b(2u, v)] − |b(2u, v)|2
.
4n2 {1 − Re[b(2u, v)]} − f |b(2u, v)|2
0
(94)
According to Eq. (91), l0 is the only length scale that determines the behavior of spatial correlations. Taking the inverse
Fourier transform of Eq. (91), one finds algebraic decay on
scales l ≫ l0 [41],
c̃(u) =

4n
π

dv

Cl ∼ −n (1 − n)

2l0
.
πl2

Sℓ ∼

(95)

From the conditional density correlation function, the second
cumulant, Eq. (26), of the subsystem number of particles follows as
X
C A(2) =
Cl−l′ ,
(96)
l,l′ ∈A

which allows us to calculate the entanglement entropy to leading order in the cumulant expansion, Eq. (25). The algebraic

4π
n (1 − n) l0 ln(ℓ/l0 ).
3

(97)

Algebraic decay of spatial correlations and logarithmic
growth of the entanglement entropy are characteristic for
a critical phase with conformal invariance [28]. However,
strong fluctuations of Goldstone modes that are not captured
by the Gaussian approximation lead to a substantial renormalization of the effective measurement rate, which invalidates
the Gaussian approximation at large scales. To treat this effect
properly, we now turn to an NLSM for fluctuations of Goldstone modes within the saddle-point manifold.

VII.

Effective field theory in the rare-measurement limit

Going beyond the Gaussian approximation, we generalize
Eq. (72) to incorporate nonlinear fluctuations around the saddle point Λ [41]:
G = −iQ/2,

Σ = γQ/(2n),

Q = RΛR−1 ,

(98)

again with the understanding that n = 1/2 and thus Λ = σz
for fermion counting. There is a subgroup U(R) × U(R) of
rotations R that leave the saddle point Λ invariant. Therefore,
nontrivial rotations of the saddle point form the symmetric
space U(2R)/U(R) × U(R). We parametrize these rotations as
−1
Q = RΦ RΘ Q0 RΘ−1 RΦ
,

(93)

For n = 1/2, we find the same expressions also for fermion
counting and for generalized occupation measurements; for
generalized occupation measurements with n , 1/2, Eq. (92)
is modified, with f = 1 − 2n, as
Z ∞

decay of Cl , Eq. (95), leads to logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy of a subsystem of length ℓ [41],

(99)

with
RΦ = eiΦσx /2 ,

RΘ = eiΘσy /2 ,

(100)

where Φ and Θ are traceless Hermitian matrices in replica
space. Furthermore,
Q0 = Rϕ Rθ ΛRθ−1 Rϕ−1 ,

(101)

where Rϕ and Rθ describe replica-symmetric rotations by the
angles ϕ and θ,
Rϕ = eiϕσx /2 ,

Rθ = eiθσy /2 .

(102)

This parametrization is chosen such that the symmetries of
the action, identified in Sec. V D, appear explicitly as factors
in the rotations R. In particular, for fermion counting the only
symmetry is given by RΦ , whereas for occupation measurements also Rϕ is a symmetry. Considering now matrices Φ
and Θ and angles ϕ and θ that vary slowly in space and time,
an effective long-wavelength field theory, given by an NLSM
for the massless Goldstone modes associated with the broken
symmetries of the action, is obtained by integrating out massive modes in the Gaussian approximation. Technical details
of this procedure are presented in Appendix G.

19
A.

ρ0 = n. This leads to

Replica-symmetric sector

We first consider the replica-symmetric sector of the theory,
where we can set R = 1 and which describes fluctuations of
the modes ϕ and θ. For fermion counting, both modes are massive and an expansion to second order yields the Lagrangian
i γ

i
νh
iL[Q0 ] = − θ∂t ϕ − (∂ x ϕ)2 + (∂ x θ)2 − θ2 + ϕ2 . (103)
2
4
2
To describe long-wavelength fluctuations, we have taken a
spatial continuum limit, in which the lattice site index l is replaced by a continuous position variable x, and we have performed an expansion in spatial and temporal derivatives as detailed in Appendix G. As an artefact of the gradient expansion,
the diffusion coefficient ν = J 2 /γ, which does not occur in the
exact correlation function, Eq. (88), appears in Eq. (103).
For occupation measurements, ϕ is massless but we can still
expand the Lagrangian in θ. We obtain
i
iL[Q0 ] = − (2 + f θ) θ∂t ϕ
4

 i
ν nh
−
1 − f 2 + 2 f θ − 1 − f 2 θ2 (∂ x ϕ)2
4
o


−i2 f ( f − θ) (∂ x ϕ) (∂ x θ) + 1 + f 2 (∂ x θ)2 , (104)
with f = 1 − 2n. Recall that we have expanded the action
to first order in γ, both in Eq. (61) and in the regularization
described in Appendix D. At this order of approximation, the
expected mass term ∼ θ2 does not occur in Eq. (104).

B.

1
trK (1 − Q0 σ x ) .
4

l0 p
2 (1 − n),
τ0

g = g0 −

(107)

However, to leading order in γ ≪ J, we can neglect fluctuations in the replica-symmetric sector and set Q0 = Λ such that

p
g0 = g[Λ] = l0 n 2 (1 − n),

(108)
where n = 1/2 for fermion counting. Indeed, for n = 1/2,
the velocity v0 and the coupling constant g0 and, therefore,
the NLSM Lagrangian in Eq. (105), are identical to the corresponding expressions for projective measurements of occupation numbers [41]. Therefore, we can expect the same quantitative behavior of correlations and entanglement in the conditional dynamics for all three types of measurements: fermion
counting and random generalized as well as projective measurements of occupation numbers.
As indicated at the beginning of Sec. V, so far, we have not
taken the PHS of the Hamiltonian, Eq. (2), into account. PHS
does not affect the theory on the Gaussian level. However,
PHS does modify the target manifold of the NLSM. The target manifold can be determined even without constructing the
NLSM explicitly. Key steps of this analysis are summarized in
Appendix H. Focusing on the replicon sector of the theory, we
find that the target manifold of the NLSM for a Hamiltonian
with PHS is SU(2R)/Sp(R). This applies to fermion counting as well as for generalized occupation measurements, and
is in agreement with other models with a conserved number
of particles [51, 53]. Crucially, the SU(2R)/Sp(R) and SU(R)
NLSMs for Hamiltonians with and without PHS, respectively,
lead to the same qualitative behavior of entanglement and correlations on large scales. This behavior is determined by the
RG flow of the coupling constant g0 . To one-loop order, the
RG flow is given by [53, 109–111]

Replicon sector

We now turn to the replicon sector. For both fermion counting and occupation measurements, the traceless Hermitian
matrices Φ are Goldstone modes. These modes parametrize
the group SU(R) as U = eiΦ . Integration over the massive
modes Θ yields an NLSM with Lagrangian given by
!
g[Q0 ]
1
trR
∂t U † ∂t U + v[Q0 ]∂ x U † ∂ x U .
iL[Φ] = −
2
v[Q0 ]
(105)
For fermion counting and occupation measurements, the velocity v[Q0 ] and coupling constant g[Q0 ] are, respectively,
p
p
v[Q0 ] = (2l0 /τ0 ) ρ0 (1 − ρ0 ), g[Q0 ] = l0 ρ0 (1 − ρ0 ),
p
p
v[Q0 ] = (l0 /τ0 ) 2 (1 − ρ0 ),
g[Q0 ] = l0 ρ0 2 (1 − ρ0 ).
(106)
A coupling between the replica-symmetric and replicon sectors of the theory is established through the dependence of
these quantities on
ρ0 =

v0 = v[Λ] =

1
ln(l/l0 ),
4πβ

(109)

where β = 1/2 and β = 1 for intact and broken PHS, respectively. In both cases, and for any value of the bare coupling
g0 , the flow reaches the strong-coupling regime g ≲ 1 at the
exponentially large scale
l∗ = l0 e4πβg0 ,

(110)

indicating that a frequent-measurement phase with area-law
entanglement is established in the thermodynamic limit.
Numerically observing emergent area-law behavior due to
the renormalization of g on exponentially large scales is challenging. However, as we show in the following, the renormalization of g leaves clear fingerprints on much shorter scales.
VIII.

Correlations and entanglement in the steady state

We will now compare analytical predictions from replica
Keldysh field theory to numerical results obtained from the
quantum jump algorithm outlined in Sec. III A. In contrast to
Sec. IV, where we have studied time-dependent correlations,
here we focus on equal-time correlations and entanglement in
the steady state. Studying carefully the crossover to area-law
entanglement on large scales, we reconcile numerical observations of algebraic correlations, logarithmic growth of the

20
10−1

Gaussian

10−2
10−3
|Cl |g0

10−0.8

γ/J
10−0.3

10−4

100.2
∼ γ −2

10−5
10−6

∼ l˜−

103

2

102
lc

entanglement entropy, and conformal invariance characteristic
of a critical phase [28], with the absence of a measurementinduced phase transition in the thermodynamic limit. Crucially, clear numerical signatures of the absence of a critical
phase in the thermodynamic limit are visible on length scales
much shorter than the exponentially large scale l∗ in Eq. (110),
and these signatures can readily be explained by the theory introduced above. We first investigate algebraic scaling of the
connected density correlation function, then focus on the entanglement entropy and the effective central charge, and finally we study the bipartite and tripartite mutual information.

101

FC
OM

100

10−7 −1
10

100

101

102

γ/J
1.60
0.80
0.64
0.56
0.48
0.40
0.36
0.32
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04

˜ 0
l/l

A.

Connected density correlation function

In the steady state, the conditional density correlation function, Eq. (82), becomes time-independent and translationally
invariant, Cl,l′ (t) = Cl−l′ . Using Wick’s theorem, the density
correlation function can be expressed in terms of the singleparticle density matrix D defined in Eq. (13):
Cl−l′ = ⟨n̂l n̂l′ ⟩ − ⟨n̂l ⟩⟨n̂l′ ⟩ =

δl,l′
2
− Dl,l′ .
2

(111)

As explained in Sec. III A, the quantum jump algorithm gives
direct access to the single-particle density matrix. Here and
in the following, we set ⟨n̂l ⟩ = n = 1/2 as in our numerical
studies. Furthermore, for all numerical results, the overbar
indicates averaging over both trajectories and position.
1.

Analytical predictions

As explained in Sec. VI B, on the Gaussian level the connected density correlation is identical for fermion counting
and random generalized as well as projective measurements
of occupation numbers. In momentum space, it is given by
Eq. (91). To incorporate the renormalization of l0 = 2g0 , we
expand the Gaussian result for low momenta and replace g0 by
its renormalized value g, Eq. (109), where we identify l = 1/q
with the external momentum of the correlation function that
cuts off the RG flow in the infrared [41]. We thus obtain the
rescaled correlation function
Cq
1
≈ 1 − 2ql0 +
ln(ql0 ).
g0 q
4πβg0

(112)

For q → 0, the logarithmic renormalization dominates, pushing Cq /(g0 q) to small values, while Cq /(g0 q) → 1 for q →
0 in the Gaussian theory. The momentum scale at which
the logarithm starts to dominate marks the beginning of the
crossover from Gaussian behavior—with algebraic correlations, Eq. (95), and logarithmic growth of the entanglement
entropy, Eq. (97)—to the emergent frequent-measurement
regime. We identify this crossover scale with the maximum

of the rescaled correlation function at qc = 4πβl02 −1 ∼ γ2 .
Associated with this momentum scale is a crossover length
scale lc ∼ γ−2 . Importantly, the crossover scale lc is only algebraically large in γ and, therefore, numerically accessible.

Figure 4. Rescaled density correlation function for fermion counting (solid lines) and generalized occupation measurements (colored
dashed lines) for various monitoring rates γ. For γ ≪ J, the data
approaches the prediction from the Gaussian theory (black dashed
˜ 0 ≫ 1. Inset: Upper
line) with an algebraic scaling of ∼ l˜−2 for l/l
boundary of the critical range lc for fermion counting (FC, blue dots)
and occupation measurements (OM, red dots), agreeing well with the
analytical prediction lc ∼ γ−2 (black dashed line). The system size is
L = 1000 and data are averaged over Ntraj = 160 trajectories for this
and all subsequent figures.

2.

Numerics

Figure 4 shows the density correlation function, Eq. (111),
as a function of the chord length ℓ̃ = (L/π) sin(πℓ/L), which
accounts for the finite system size and periodic boundary conditions, for both fermion counting (solid lines) and generalized occupation measurements (dashed lines). The quantitative agreement between both models despite their fundamentally different dynamics is remarkable. For comparison, we
show the Gaussian result, obtained by numerically taking the
inverse Fourier transform of Eq. (91) (black dashed line). The
Gaussian result transitions from slow decay at short distances
l˜ ≪ l0 to algebraic scaling Cl ∼ l˜−2 on large scales l˜ ≫ l0 .
For small values of γ, the numerical data follows the Gaussian result up to intermediate scales. However, in accord with
the renormalized correlation function, Eq. (112), the decay
of the correlation function visibly becomes faster than algebraic beyond a crossover scale lc . To quantify the deviation
from the Gaussian prediction, we define lc as the scale beyond
which the numerical data deviates from a line ∼ l˜−2 , put tangentially to the data, by more than 10 %. As shown in the inset
of Fig. 4, the crossover scale exhibits the scaling lc ∼ γ−2 , confirming our expectation based on replica Keldysh field theory.
The critical range of algebraic behavior of spatial correlations
is thus bounded from below by l0 and from above by lc as
sketched in Fig. 2(c).

B.

Entanglement entropy

We now turn to the von Neumann entanglement entropy S ℓ ,
Eq. (24), of a subsystem A consisting of ℓ contiguous lattice

21

c
S ℓ ∼ ln(ℓ) ,
3

(113)

3.5

∼ `˜

3.0

2.0
1.5

Gaussian
volume-law

0.5
0.0

Analytical predictions

The Gaussian theory predicts logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy, Eq. (97), with a central charge given by
2πg0 . To quantify the agreement of our numerical results
with this prediction, we find it useful to introduce an effective
scale-dependent central charge cℓ . Equation (113) suggests to
define cℓ as the derivative of S ℓ with respect to ln(ℓ). However,
since ℓ is an integer, we define cℓ as the discrete difference,
cℓ = 3

S ℓ′ − S ℓ
,
ln(ℓ′ /ℓ)

1.60
0.80
0.64
0.56
0.48
0.40
0.36
0.32
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04
3

1.0

can be observed within the critical range ℓ ∈ [l0 , lc ].
1.

γ/J

˜
∼ ln(`)

2.5
S` /(2πg0 /3)

sites. The RG flow of the NLSM indicates that area-law scaling of the entanglement entropy is established beyond the exponentially large scale l∗ in Eq. (110). However, logarithmic
growth of S ℓ as characteristic for a one-dimensional conformal field theory with central charge c [78, 112],

(114)

where ℓ′ should be chosen such that ℓ′ /ℓ = eϵ with ϵ ≪ 1.
For logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy as in
Eq. (113), this definition yields cℓ = c; volume-law scaling
results in cℓ ∼ ℓ, while area-law behavior leads to cℓ = 0.
To obtain an analytical prediction for cℓ , we extend the
Gaussian result, Eq. (97), by including higher orders in an
asymptotic expansion in ℓ ≫ l0 ≫ 1 and incorporating the
renormalization of g0 , Eq. (109). This can be achieved by
expressing the entanglement entropy S ℓ using the cumulant
expansion, Eq. (96), and Eq. (25) as
Z

2π ∞ dq 
Sℓ =
Cq 1 − cos(qℓ)
(115)
3 0 q2
and expanding the Gaussian result for Cq , Eq. (91), to third
order in ql0 . We thus obtain
!
!2
7l02
Sℓ
ℓ
1
ℓ
∼ ln
+ s0 + 2 −
ln
,
(116)
2πg0 /3
l0
8πβg0
l0
ℓ
where s0 is a constant that does not depend on ℓ. The first three
terms on the right-hand side describe the asymptotic behavior
of S ℓ predicted by the Gaussian theory, with the leading contribution reproducing the CFT form, Eq. (113), with a central
charge c = 2πg0 . Renormalization effects are contained in the
last term. The effective central charge, Eq. (114), is then
!
14l02
cℓ
1
ℓ
∼1− 2 −
ln
.
(117)
2πg0
4πβg0
l0
ℓ
As explained above, cℓ → 2πg0 for ℓ ≫ l0 would correspond
to logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy. However,
the last term in Eq. (117), which is due to the renormalization
of g0 , causes the value of cℓ to decrease with ℓ. Consequently,
cℓ is never constant but only takes a maximum at
p
ℓmax,c ∼ 2 14πβl03/2 .
(118)

100

10−1

101
˜ 0
`/l

102

10

Figure 5. Rescaled entanglement entropy for fermion counting (solid
lines) and generalized occupation measurements (colored dashed
lines), for a subsystem of size ℓ of a system with periodic boundary
conditions (see inset). Thicker lines indicate the extent of the critical
range ℓ̃ ∈ [l0 , lc ]. The critical range is analogously indicated in the
figures below. For γ ≪ J, the numerical data approach the Gaussian
result obtained by inserting Eq. (91) in Eq. (115) (black dashed line),
which grows logarithmically ∼ ln(ℓ̃) for ℓ̃ ≫ l0 . Volume-law scaling
with S ℓ ∼ ℓ can be observed at ℓ̃ ≲ l0 (purple dashed line).

The scaling ℓmax,c ∼ l03/2 ∼ γ−3/2 implies that the maximum
of the effective central charge cmax is within the critical range,
which is bounded from below by l0 ∼ γ−1 and from above
by the crossover scale lc ∼ γ−2 . In the vicinity of the maximum, the entanglement entropy again obeys the CFT form,
Eq. (113), but with c = cmax < 2πg0 approaching the Gaussian
result c = 2πg0 only for γ ≪ J. It is worthwhile to reiterate
that while the Gaussian theory predicts unbounded logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy on scales ℓ ≳ l0 and
with c = 2πg0 , the renormalization of g0 results in the range
of logarithmic growth being restricted to ℓ ≲ lc , and with a
reduced value of the effective central charge cmax < 2πg0 .
2.

Numerics

To confirm these predictions, we have determined the entanglement entropy and effective central charge numerically.
For a subsystem A of size ℓ, the entanglement entropy,
Eq. (24), can be obtained from the eigenvalues λl of the reduced single-particle density matrix DA = (D)l,l′ ∈A as [113]
Sℓ = −

ℓ
X

[λl ln(λl ) + (1 − λl ) ln(1 − λl )],

(119)

l=1

where the overbar again denotes an average over both trajectories and position.
Figure 5 shows the entanglement entropy for ℓ ∈
{1, . . . , L/2} for fermion counting (solid lines) and generalized
occupation measurements (dashed lines). Qualitatively, these
results appear to support the existence of an entanglement
transition between a critical phase with logarithmic growth of
the entanglement entropy and an area law phase for larger values of γ. However, an analysis of the effective central charge

1.00

Gaussian

10−0.2
10−1.2
γ/J∼ γ −3/2 103.0
101.5
100.0

FC
OM

`max,c

c` /(2πg0 )

0.75

cmax 100.8

cmax/(2π)

22

0.50 10−1.2 10−0.4
γ/J
0.25

0.00

10−1

100

101

102

γ/J
1.60
0.80
0.64
0.56
0.48
0.40
0.36
0.32
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04

˜ 0
`/l

Figure 6. Rescaled effective central charge calculated by applying
Eq. (120) to the data shown in Fig. 5 for fermion counting (solid
lines) and generalized occupation measurements (colored dashed
lines). For γ ≪ J, the data approach the Gaussian result (black
dashed line). Upper inset: scaling of the maximum of the central
charge cmax for fermion counting (blue dots) and occupation measurements (red dots) compared to the prediction obtained by inserting Eq. (118) in Eq. (117) (black dashed line). Lower inset: scaling
of the position of the maximum ℓmax,c of the central charge. The data
agree with the predicted scaling ∼ γ−3/2 , Eq. (118).

cℓ reveals clear evidence for an area-law phase for all values
of γ, as predicted analytically.
To account for the finite system size and periodic boundary conditions imposed in our numerical studies, we rewrite
the definition of the effective scale-dependent central charge,
Eq. (114), in terms of chord lengths,
cℓ = 3

S ℓ′ − S ℓ
.
ln(ℓ˜′ /ℓ̃)

(120)

Ideally, the ratio ℓ̃′ /ℓ̃ should be close to one and not depend
on ℓ. In practice, due to ℓ being an integer, these conditions
cannot be met uniformly over the entire range of values from
ℓ = 1 to ℓ = L/2. To calculate cℓ numerically, we have chosen
Nℓ values ℓi with ℓ1 = 1 and ℓNℓ = L/2 such that ℓ̃′ /ℓ̃ =
ℓ̃i+1 /ℓ̃i = eϵi is approximately constant. For Nℓ = 66, we
obtain ϵi < 0.1 for i > 10, ensuring that corrections to the
value of cℓ obtained in the limit ϵi → 0 are small.
Figure 6 shows the effective central charge for fermion
counting (solid lines) and generalized occupation measurements (colored dashed lines). As anticipated in Fig. 2(c),
cℓ first grows with ℓ, then reaches a maximum cmax at a
scale ℓmax,c , and eventually starts to decrease, indicating the
crossover to the area-law regime. The lower inset shows that
the position of the maximum scales as ℓmax,c ∼ γ−3/2 , in good
agreement with Eq. (118) and within the critical range between l0 ∼ γ−1 and lc ∼ γ−2 . This finding demonstrates that
the logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy observed
in Fig. 5 for small values of γ and for ℓ → L/2 is due to lc becoming larger than L/2, and that the apparent transition from
a critical phase to an area-law phase at larger γ is, in fact, due
to lc dropping below L/2.
Another signature of an apparent KT transition is a discontinuous jump of the central charge at a finite critical value

γc [28]. As we discuss in Sec. VIII C next, it is the maximum
value cmax of cℓ that yields best agreement with CFT predictions within the critical range. The dependence of this maximum value on γ is shown in the upper inset in Fig. 6, where
we observe good agreement with the prediction obtained by
inserting Eq. (118) in Eq. (117). In particular, the maximum
value cmax varies smoothly with γ, providing further evidence
for the absence of a KT transition at a finite γc .

C.

Mutual information and conformal invariance

The scaling of the entanglement entropy, Eq. (24), with
subsystem size is the key property distinguishing different
measurement-induced phases. More refined measures of entanglement such as the bi- and tripartite mutual information
have proven useful for locating critical points and characterizing critical phases. In particular, these quantities carry signatures of conformal invariance.
The bipartite mutual information of two disjoint subsystems
A and C, separated by a third subsystem B, is defined as
I2 = S A + S C − S A∪C ,

(121)

and provides a measure for the correlations between subsystem A and C [114]. In studies of measurement-induced transitions in quantum circuits, for subsystems of size ℓA = ℓC =
L/8 and ℓB = 3L/8, the bipartite mutual information has been
found to decay exponentially with system size L in both arealaw and volume-law phases [3, 5]. At the critical point, I2 exhibits a peak that remains finite in the thermodynamic limit.
Likewise, the tripartite mutual information, defined as
I3 = S A + S B + S C + S A∪B∪C − S A∪B − S B∪C − S A∪C ,

(122)

remains finite at the critical point [7, 9, 11]. In the area-law
phase, I3 vanishes, and it has an extensive negative value in
the volume-law phase.
Apart from being indicators of measurement-induced phase
transitions, the interest in the bi- and tripartite mutual information is due to the existence of analytical predictions for these
quantities for one-dimensional CFTs. These predictions are
expected to apply at critical points and in critical phases [28].
In CFTs, I2 and I3 depend only on the cross ratio [115–117]
x=

ℓA ℓC
ℓA∪B ℓB∪C

(123)

and are given by
I2 =

!
c
1
ln
+ G(x),
3
1−x

I3 = G(x),

(124)

where c is the central charge of the CFT and G(x) is a universal function that depends on the full operator content of the
theory. For finite systems with periodic boundary conditions,
the subsystem sizes ℓA , ℓC , ℓA∪B , and ℓB∪C should be replaced
by the corresponding chord lengths.

23
0.07

!"
#
14 (3 − x) x2 l02
ln(ℓ/l0 )
I2
1
1−
. (125)
∼ ln
−
2πg0 /3
1−x
4πβg0
(1 − x)2 ℓ2

!−1/2

x 3/2
l ,
|1 − x| 0

(126)

which scales with the measurement rate as ℓmax,I2 ∼ γ−3/2 , in
analogy to the position of the maximum of the effective central
charge given in Eq. (118).
On the same order of approximation that we have used to
obtain predictions for the entanglement entropy and the bipartite mutual information, the tripartite mutual information vanP
(2)
ishes. Indeed, generalizing Eq. (96) to C A,B
= l∈A,l′ ∈B Cl−l′
(2)
such that C A(2) = C A,A
, and using that the density correlation
function, Eq. (82), is symmetric under the exchange of l and
(2)
(2)
l′ , we obtain C A∪B,A∪B
= C A(2) + C (2)
B + 2C A,B for any two disjoint subsystems A and B. Then, keeping only the contribution from the second cumulant in Eq. (25), we find I3 = 0,
indicating that the leading contribution to the tripartite mutual
information comes from the fourth cumulant. However, the
fourth cumulant vanishes in a Gaussian theory. In fact, the numerical results for I3 presented below show qualitatively different behavior for fermion counting and generalized occupation measurements. Explaining these differences analytically
would require going beyond not only the Gaussian theory but
even the long-wavelength effective field theory developed in
Sec. VII, which is identical for both types of measurements.
2.

Numerics

Figure 7 shows the bipartite mutual information for ℓA =
ℓC = ℓ and ℓB ≈ 3ℓ chosen such that the cross ratio, Eq. (123),
is x ≈ 1/16 for all values of ℓ ∈ {1, . . . , L/8}. The variations
of ℓB /ℓ ≈ 3 result in slight discontinuities in the data. Combining the finite-size phase diagram sketched in Fig. 2(c) with
the known behavior of I2 across measurement-induced phase
transitions [3, 5], we expect the bipartite mutual information
to be finite only within the critical range, and to decay toward
zero for both ℓ̃ ≪ l0 and ℓ̃ ≫ lc . This expectation is confirmed
in Fig. 7, where we find the mutual information to reach a
maximum at ℓmax,I2 ∼ γ−3/2 , within the critical range and in
good agreement with the scaling predicted by Eq. (126). We
note that agreement between the numerical results for γ ≪ J
and the results obtained from the Gaussian theory is worse
for the bipartite mutual information than for the entanglement
entropy shown in Fig. 5. As we have confirmed numerically,

10−1.0

10−0.5
γ/J

0.03

100.0

0.01
0.00

100

10−1

101

1.60
0.80
0.64
0.56
0.48
0.40
0.36
0.32
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04

˜ 0
`/l

Figure 7. Rescaled bipartite mutual information for fermion counting (solid lines) and generalized occupation measurements (colored
dashed lines) for subsystem sizes ℓA = ℓC = ℓ and ℓB ≈ 3ℓ (see
lower inset) chosen to approximately fix the cross ratio, Eq. (123),
to x ≈ 1/16, with deviations < 1 %. The Gaussian approximation
is shown for comparison (black dashed line). Upper inset: scaling
of the position of the maximum of the bipartite mutual information
ℓmax,I2 for fermion counting (blue dots) and occupation measurements
(red dots), approaching the theoretical prediction, Eq. (126), for
γ ≪ J (black dashed line). The considered subsystems are sketched
in the lower left corner for periodic boundary conditions.
0.0025

γ/J

volume-law

0.0000
I3 /(2πg0 /3)

1
1−x

0.04

100

Gaussian

0.02

For fixed cross ratio x and considered as a function of ℓ, the
bipartite mutual information exhibits a maximum at
p
ℓmax,I2 = 2 14πβ (3 − x) ln

FC
OM

0.05

γ/J

−0.0025

∼ `˜

−0.0050

γ/J
10−1.310−0.6 100.1

−0.0075

∼ γ −1

−0.0100
−0.0125

FC
OM
10−1

102
101
100

`min,I3

Proceeding as described in Sec. VIII B for the entanglement
entropy, we can obtain analytical predictions for the mutual
information, Eq. (121). For subsystems of size ℓA = ℓC = ℓ
and ℓB = ℓ′ with ℓ, ℓ′ ≫ l0 ≫ 1, we find

2
∼ γ −3/2 10
101

0.06

`max,I2

Analytical predictions

I2 /(2πg0 /3)

1.

100
˜ 0
`/l

101

1.60
0.80
0.64
0.56
0.48
0.40
0.36
0.32
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04

Figure 8. Rescaled tripartite mutual information for fermion counting (solid lines) and generalized occupation measurements (colored
dashed lines) for the same choice of subsystems as in Fig. 7. Volumelaw behavior ∼ ℓ̃ is shown for comparison (purple dashed line). Inset: the position of the minimum of the tripartite mutual information
ℓmin,I3 scales as ∼ γ−1 (black dashed line) both for fermion counting
(blue dots) and occupation measurements (red dots).

this discrepancy can be traced back to contributions from cumulants of higher than second order in Eq. (25), which we
neglect in the Gaussian results, and which are more important
for the mutual information.
The tripartite mutual information is shown in Fig.8 for the
same choice of subsystems as in Fig. 7. On short scales ℓ̃ ≲ l0 ,
the tripartite mutual information behaves as expected in a
volume-law phase, growing extensively to negative values for
both fermion counting (solid lines) and occupation measurements (dashed lines). The minimum value of I3 is reached at

24
108 relative ln offset = 2
106

`

I2 − I3

104
102
100

10−2

γ/J = 0.2

1
2
5
10
20
50
100
200
400
cmax
1
3 ln 1−x

10−4
10−5

10−4

10−3

10−2

10−1



100

x

Figure 9. Difference between bi- and tripartite mutual information
for fermion counting with γ/J = 0.2 (colored lines). The subsystem
size ℓA = ℓC = ℓ is fixed for each curve according to the legend,
while ℓB = ℓ′ is varied to sample different values of the cross ratio x.
For better visibility, each curve with ℓ > 1 is shifted by a factor of
e2 relative to the curve with the next smaller value of ℓ, as indicated
in the top center. The CFT prediction (black dashed line) coincides
with the data when ℓ′ is within the critical range (thicker colored
lines). Violations of conformal invariance occur both on short scales
ℓ̃′ ≲ al0 (large values of x) and large scales ℓ̃′ ≳ lc (small values of
x), where the factor a = 8 is introduced such that the lower bound
agrees with the onset of algebraic scaling observed in Fig. 4.

ℓmin,I3 ∼ γ−1 , close to the lower boundary of the critical phase
at l0 ∼ γ−1 . Notably, on scales ℓ̃ ≳ l0 beyond the volumelaw regime, the tripartite mutual information shows qualitatively different behavior for fermion counting and generalized
occupation measurements. For fermion counting, I3 remains
negative, and approaches I3 → 0 from below for ℓ̃ → ∞, as
expected in an area-law phase. In contrast, for generalized
occupation measurements, I3 crosses to positive values and
eventually approaches zero from above. These findings confirm that the tripartite mutual information probes behavior that
is not captured by the long-wavelength effective field theory
developed in Sec. VII, as discussed above.
So far, we have considered the bi- and tripartite mutual information for fixed cross ratio x and as a function of subsystem size ℓ. We now turn to a more stringent test of conformal invariance within the critical range. As we have discussed in Sec. VIII B, on scales ℓ ≳ l0 , the Gaussian theory
predicts logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy with
a central charge c = 2πg0 . However, due the renormalization of g0 induced by strong fluctuations of massless replicon
modes, the range of approximately logarithmic growth is actually bounded by ℓ ≲ lc , and the value of the central charge,
given by the maximum value cmax of cℓ , is reduced as compared to the Gaussian result. These insights serve as a guideline in searching for signatures of emergent conformal symmetry in I2 and I3 .
For a CFT, it follows from Eq. (124) that the difference I2 −
I3 is fully determined by the central charge and the cross ratio,
!
c
1
I2 − I3 = ln
.
(127)
3
1−x
This difference is shown for fermion counting in Fig. 9. We

have obtained similar results for generalized occupation measurements, but do not show them for the sake of brevity. A
moderate value of γ/J = 0.2 is chosen here to best illustrate
deviations from conformal invariance at both short and large
scales. Each curve corresponds to a fixed value of ℓA = ℓC = ℓ,
while ℓB = ℓ′ is varied to sample different values of the cross
ratio x, Eq. (123). We find good agreement with the CFT
prediction, Eq. (127), for values ℓ̃′ ∈ [al0 , lc ] within the critical range and when the central charge c in Eq. (127) is set
to the maximum value cmax of the effective central charge cℓ
shown in Fig. 6. The factor a = 8 is introduced such that
the lower bound agrees with the onset of algebraic scaling on
scales l˜ ≫ l0 in Fig. 4. These results provide strong evidence
for emergent conformal invariance within the critical range.
It should be noted that for the data shown in Fig. 9, I3 is
typically several orders of magnitude smaller than I2 . Therefore, the picture does not change when I2 is considered instead of I2 − I3 . The collapse of I2 as a function of the cross
ratio for continuous measurements of occupation numbers described by a quantum state diffusion equation has been shown
in Ref. [28] for a selection of subsystems. However, only the
systematic analysis of the dependence on subsystem size presented above, which avoids an undersampling of subsystem
sizes outside of the critical range, has allowed us to demonstrate that there is agreement with the CFT expectation only
within the critical range and for c = cmax .
Finally, we apply the same analysis to the tripartite mutual information. We have argued in Sec. VIII B that logarithmic growth of the entanglement entropy within the critical
range is described by the Gaussian theory with perturbative
corrections due the nonlinearity of the sigma model manifold.
This level of the theoretical description should, therefore, capture all signatures of emergent conformal invariance. However, as shown above, the tripartite mutual information vanishes in the Gaussian theory, and cannot be obtained from the
NLSM. These observations suggest that G(x) = 0 in Eq. (124),
and that nonzero values of I3 can be attributed to nonuniversal fluctuations on short scales. Indeed, we do not observe
a collapse of I3 plotted as a function of the cross ratio in
Fig. 10. As we have already seen in Fig. 8, the tripartite mutual information exhibits qualitatively different behavior for
fermion counting and occupation measurements, with I3 assuming only negative values for fermion counting but changing sign for occupation measurements.

IX.

Conclusions and outlook

We have presented an in-depth comparative study of two 1D
models of free fermions subjected to different types of generalized measurement processes: monitored loss and gain or
fermion counting on the one hand, and generalized measurements of local occupation numbers on the other hand. A high
rate of fermion counts signals fast fluctuations of the quantum
state of the fermionic many-body system. In contrast, generalized or projective measurements of occupation numbers lead
to a freezing of the dynamics. Despite this striking difference,
the dynamics of both models have important similarities in

25
of the quantum state of the system. Our work thus settles the
question about the requirements to observe a measurementinduced entanglement transition in 1D free fermions.
Furthermore, our work opens up several interesting directions for future research. While there is no measurementinduced phase transition in the considered models in 1D, such
a transition does occur in higher dimensions [42, 47]. It will
be interesting to study the impact of the breaking of particlenumber conservation by fermion counting on the dynamical critical behavior. A classification of dynamical criticality
based on symmetries and conservation laws—in analogy to
the classification of dynamical criticality in thermodynamic
equilibrium [118]—is an interesting prospect. However, exploring this possibility analytically by studying, for example,
D
ED
E
two-time correlation functions such as Â(t) B̂(t′ ) will require a nontrivial extension of the replica Keldysh formalism.

Figure 10. Tripartite mutual information as a function of the cross
ratio x for (a) fermion counting and (b) occupation measurements on
a symmetric logarithmic scale and with γ/J = 0.2. In contrast to
I2 − I3 shown in Fig. 9, the tripartite mutual information I3 shows
qualitatively different behavior for fermion counting and occupation
measurements, and does not collapse to a single function of the cross
ratio within the critical range.

the frequent-measurement limit: emergent classicality and a
suppression of coherent dynamics, which are hallmarks of the
quantum Zeno effect for occupation measurements and which
we attribute to a generalized Zeno effect for fermion counting. These similarities explain heuristically why both models
exhibit close to identical results in various observables in the
steady state, including density correlations, the entanglement
entropy, and the bipartite mutual information. There are qualitative differences only in the tripartite mutual information.
Combining analytical insights from replica Keldysh field
theory with numerical results from simulations of quantum
jump trajectories, we have provided strong evidence for the
absence of a measurement-induced entanglement transition in
both models. In particular, we have shown that characteristic
signatures of a critical phase can be observed only within a
well-defined and finite range of length scales. Crucially, the
upper boundary lc ∼ γ−2 of this critical range is only algebraically large in the measurement rate, and, therefore, observable in numerics.
Formally, these properties can be understood to result from
the universal long-wavelength description in terms of an
NLSM that applies to both models. We have clarified the origin of the underlying SU(R) symmetry, and provided a physical explanation for the occurrence of this symmetry in terms
of (i) conservation of the total number of particles in the system and auxiliary reservoirs and (ii) preservation of the purity

From a more formal perspective, the stochastic Schrödinger
equation (3) can be regarded as an unraveling of a quantum
master equation that is recovered by taking the average over
the stochastic increments dNα,l (t). While here we have considered cases for which the stationary state of the unconditional
dynamics described by the master equation is trivial, this is
generically not the case, and jump operators can be chosen so
as to prepare a state of interest. For example, consider a 1D
fermionic chain that is connected to particle reservoirs only
at its ends and in such a way that a finite current is driven
through the system. An unraveling of the corresponding master equation represents an interesting setup to study the interplay of transport and entanglement dynamics on the level of
individual quantum trajectories. However, such an unraveling can, in general, not be formulated as a random generalized measurement as we have done here, and the derivation
of a replica Keldysh field theory described in Sec. V has to
be modified. Based on such an extension of the formalism, a
further interesting perspective is to investigate quantum jump
unravelings of quadratic fermionic Liouvillians belonging to
different symmetry classes [119–122]. The resulting replica
Keldysh field theories and NLSMs will shed further light on
the connections between the dynamics of continuously monitored quantum systems in d spatial dimensions and the physics
of Anderson localization in d + 1 dimensions [111].
Finally, let us discuss implications of our work beyond noninteracting fermions. As we have already mentioned, our results show that charge sharpening, which has recently been
discussed in random quantum circuits [17, 18, 21, 67] and interacting fermionic systems [52, 53], can occur even in the
absence of charge conservation: For free fermionic systems,
Eq. (25) relates the entanglement entropy to the variance of
the subsystem charge, that is, the second cumulant of the subsystem particle number; in particular, area-law scaling of the
entanglement entropy, which we have found to be induced by
fermion counting, implies that the system is in a charge-sharp
phase [21]. It is an interesting prospect for future studies to explore charge sharpening in interacting fermionic systems and
random quantum circuits with broken charge conservation.

26
Acknowledgments

E.S. and L.S. acknowledge support from the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) through the projects 10.55776/P33741 and
10.55776/COE1, and from the European Union - NextGenerationEU. For open access purposes, the authors have applied a CC BY public copyright license to any author accepted
manuscript version arising from this submission.
Data availability

α=±

The data that support the findings of this article are openly
available [123].
A.

Minimal physical models and their description through a
stochastic Schrödinger equation

In this appendix, we outline the derivation of the stochastic Schrödinger equation (3) for minimal physical models of
fermion counting and generalized occupation measurements.
These models are inspired by theoretical descriptions of continuous measurements in mesoscopic electronics [75].
1.

Fermion counting

We consider the setup of a quantum dot coupled to two
reservoirs described in Sec. III A [75]. The quantum dot corresponds to a single fermionic lattice site, with annihilation and
creation operators ψ̂ and ψ̂† , respectively, and Hamiltonian
Ĥ0 = ω0 ψ̂† ψ̂.

(A1)

We denote the reservoir annihilation and creation operators
by b̂α,k and b̂†α,k , where α = − for the reservoir that acts as the
drain, α = + for the reservoir that acts as the source, and k is
a discrete index that labels the reservoir states. The Hamiltonians of the reservoirs states with energies ωα,k read
X
Ĥα =
ωα,k b̂†α,k b̂α,k ,
(A2)
k

and the reservoirs are coupled to the quantum dot by
X

∗
Ĥcoup = i
T α,k ψ̂† b̂α,k − T α,k
b̂†α,k ψ̂ ,

move to an interaction frame with respect to the bath Hamiltonians, Eq. (A2), and integrate the Schrödinger equation for
the state |Ψ(t)⟩ of the dot and reservoirs in small time steps
∆t. In Born and Markov approximations, the increment of the
wave function, ∆|Ψ(t)⟩ = |Ψ(t + ∆t)⟩ − |Ψ(t)⟩, is given by [73]
h
i
√
√
∆|Ψ(t)⟩ = −iĤeff ∆t + 2L̂− ∆ B̂†− (t) + 2L̂+ ∆ B̂+ (t) |Ψ(t)⟩.
(A4)
The effective Hamiltonian reads
X
Ĥeff = Ĥ0 − i
L̂α† L̂α ,
(A5)

(A3)

α,k

with tunneling coefficients T α,k . Both reservoirs are assumed
to be in thermodynamic equilibrium at a low temperature,
with chemical potentials chosen such that the reservoir states
at the energy ω0 are empty in the drain and occupied in the
source. We model this scenario by assuming the dot and reservoirs to be in the pure state |Ψ(0)⟩ = |ψ(0), 0− , 1+ ⟩ at time
t = 0, with 0− and 1+ denoting empty and occupied states of
the drain and source, respectively.
Our goal is to derive a stochastic Schrödinger equation describing the dynamics of the quantum dot. As a first step, we

where L̂− = γ− /2 ψ̂ and L̂+ = γ+ /2 ψ̂† are the jump operators defined in Eq. (4) for a single lattice site. Furthermore,
in Eq. (A4), we have introduced quantum Itô increments,
s Z
t+∆t
X
2
′
(A6)
∆ B̂α (t) =
T α,k b̂α,k e−iωα,k t ,
dt′
γα t
k
p

p

which obey the anticommutation relations
n
o
∆ B̂α (t), ∆ B̂†α (t′ ) = ∆t δt,t′ ,

(A7)

where δt,t′ is the Kronecker delta for discrete times t and t′ .
The operators ∆ B̂α (t) and ∆ B̂†α (t) destroy and create fermions
in the drain and source at a given time t, as opposed to the
operators b̂α,k and b̂α,k , which are associated with a frequency
ωα,k . Finally, the loss and gain rates appearing in Eq. (A4) are
defined as γα = 2πρ± (ω0 ) |T ± (ω0 )|, where ρα (ω0 ) and T α (ω0 )
are the density of states and tunneling amplitudes at the energy
of the dot, which
upon taking the continuum
P are Rintroduced
∞
limit such that k → 0 dω ρα (ω) and T α,k → T α (ω) [75].
The operators L̂− ∆ B̂†− (t) and L̂+ ∆ B̂+ (t) in Eq. (A4) describe
the transfer of a fermion from the quantum dot to the drain and
from the source to the dot, respectively. Since the Itô increments anticommute at different times, a fermion that has been
transferred from the dot to the drain at time t cannot be transferred back at a later time t′ . Formally, the state ∆ B̂†− (t)|0− ⟩ is
annihilated by ∆ B̂− (t′ ). An analogous argument applies to the
transfer of fermions from the source to the dot. Therefore, in
Eq. (A4), the operators ∆ B̂− (t) and ∆ B̂†+ (t) do not occur.
In analogy to photon counting in quantum optics, fermion
counting is implemented by measuring the number operators,
N̂α (t) =

∆ B̂†α (t) ∆ B̂α (t)
,
√
√
∆t
∆t

(A8)

at each time step, with possible measurement outcomes
Nα (t) = 0, 1. To provide a physical interpretation of these
measurements, we may again take inspiration from mesoscopic electronics [75]. In this context, we can imagine the
reservoirs as being connected via ohmic contacts to an external circuit, such that a fermion in the drain is quickly absorbed
in the circuit, and a fermion transferred from the source to the
quantum dot is quickly replenished. These processes lead to
measurable current spikes in the external circuit. The presence
or absence of such spikes at time t can thus be interpreted as a
projective measurements of the occupation numbers N̂α (t).

27
To describe the statistics of the measurement outcomes and
the change of the state of the quantum dot for a given outcome,
it is convenient to rewrite Eq. (A4) in the form



∆ B̂+ (t) 
∆ B̂†− (t)
+ M̂+ √
|Ψ(t + ∆t)⟩ =  M̂0 + M̂− √
 |Ψ(t)⟩, (A9)
∆t
∆t
where the measurement operators are defined as
√
√
M̂0 = 1 − iĤeff ∆t, M̂− = 2∆t L̂− , M̂+ = 2∆t L̂+ .
(A10)
A measurement of the number operators, Eq. (A8), performed
on the state |Ψ(t + ∆t)⟩, Eq. (A9), yields N− (t) = 0 and N+ (t) =
1 with probability
D
E
p0 (t) = ψ(t) M̂0† M̂0 ψ(t) .
(A11)
After a measurement with this outcome, the state of the quantum dot is given by


X

M̂0 |ψ(t)⟩ 
|ψ(t+∆t)⟩ = p
= 1 − iĤeff ∆t +
p̃α (t)∆t |ψ(t)⟩,
p0 (t)
α=±
(A12)
where we have expanded the denominator up to order ∆t, and
where, as in Eq. (5), we have defined
D
E
p̃α (t) = ψ(t) L̂α† L̂α ψ(t) .
(A13)
The measurement outcome above and the change of the state
in Eq. (A12) correspond to the case that no quantum jump
has occurred during the time step, and the states of drain
and source remain unchanged. In contrast, for N− (t) = 1
and N+ (t) = 1, one fermion has been transferred from the
quantum dot to the drain. This happens with probability
p− (t) = 2 p̃− (t)∆t, and the state after the measurement is
M̂− |ψ(t)⟩ L̂− |ψ(t)⟩
= p
.
|ψ(t + ∆t)⟩ = p
p− (t)
p̃− (t)

2.

Generalized occupation measurements

Measurements of the occupation of a quantum dot can be
implemented by modifying the above setup as outlined in
Sec. III A: Instead of tunneling from the reservoirs to the dot
as described by Eq. (A3), we consider tunneling directly from
the source to the drain which, however, is possible only when
the dot is occupied [75],
X


(A17)
Ĥcoup = i
ψ̂† ψ̂ χb̂†−,k b̂+,q − χ∗ b̂†+,q b̂−,k .
k,q

This coupling Hamiltonian, with a mode-independent tunneling rate χ, is a simplified version of a setup that has been realized in mesoscopic devices, for example, in Ref. [80].
As above, we integrate the Schrödinger equation for the dot
and reservoirs in small time steps, leading to
h
i
√
∆|Ψ(t)⟩ = −iĤeff ∆t + 2L̂∆ B̂(t) |Ψ(t)⟩,

(A15)

Performing measurements of the number operators,
Eq. (A8), in each time step results in stochastic dynamics of
the wave function of the quantum dot, conditional to the measurement outcomes. To formulate these dynamics as an evolution equation, we define stochastic increments ∆Nα (t) = 0, 1
that count the number of fermions that are transferred from
the dot to the drain and from the source to the dot during the
step from t to t + ∆t. Neglecting terms of order ∆Nα (t)∆t [75],
we can thus write the increment of the wave function as



X



∆|ψ(t)⟩ = 
p̃α (t) ∆t
−iĤeff +


α=±




X  L̂α






+
− 1 ∆Nα (t)
|ψ(t)⟩. (A16)
 p


p̃α (t)
α=±

(A18)

√
where n̂ = ψ̂† ψ̂ and L̂ = γ n̂. The measurement rate is
2
γ = 2πρ− (ω0 )ρ+ (ω0 ) |χ| (µ+ − µ− ), where µα are the chemical
potentials of the reservoirs, and the effective Hamiltonian is
given by

(A14)

For N− (t) = 0 and N+ (t) = 0, a fermion has been transferred
from the source to the dot, which happens with probability
p+ (t) = 2 p̃+ (t)∆t. Then, the state after the measurement is
M̂+ |ψ(t)⟩ L̂+ |ψ(t)⟩
|ψ(t + ∆t)⟩ = p
= p
.
p+ (t)
p̃+ (t)

In the limit of infinitesimal time steps, ∆t → dt, the stochastic
increments ∆Nα (t) → dNα (t) describe a Poisson point process
with the properties specified in Sec. III A [124], and the evolution of the quantum dot is then described by the stochastic
Schrödinger equation (3) with L = 1 and where we omit the
contribution from Ĥ0 , Eq. (A1), which leads to a global phase
factor for each trajectory.

Ĥeff = Ĥ0 − iL̂† L̂.

(A19)

We have again introduced quantum Itô increments,
r
∆ B̂(t) =

γ ∗
χ
2

Z t+∆t
t

dt′

X

b̂†−,k b̂+,q e−i(ω+,q −ω−,k )t .
′

(A20)

k,q

which obey canonical anticommutation relations,
n
o
∆ B̂(t), ∆ B̂† (t′ ) = ∆t δt,t′ .

(A21)

From here on, the derivation of the stochastic Schrödinger
equation describing the dynamics of the quantum dot is analogous to the one for fermion counting outlined above.

B.

Implementation of generalized measurements

The generalized measurements described by Eqs. (15)
and (16) can be implemented through projective measurements, performed on auxiliary degrees of freedom, as explained in the following.

28
1.

2.

Fermion counting

As in Appendix A, we consider first a single fermionic site
or quantum dot, coupled to two reservoirs, designated as drain
and source. However, the reservoirs comprise a single state
each, and not a continuum of states as above. Our goal is
to implement a generalized measurement on the quantum dot
with measurement operators M̂− = ψ̂ and M̂+ = ψ̂† . Before
the measurement, the drain is empty, the source is filled, and
the quantum dot is in an arbitrary superposition state,


|Ψ⟩ = c0 + c1 ψ̂† b̂†+ |0⟩,
(B1)
where |0⟩ is the vacuum state of dot, drain, and source. To implement the measurement, we first entangle the quantum dot
with the reservoirs by applying two gates sequentially. The
first gate, Û− , transfers a fermion from the dot to the drain,

iπ  †
ψ̂ b̂− − b̂†− ψ̂ .
Û− = e−iV̂− ,
V̂− =
(B2)
2
The second gate, Û+ , fills the dot from the source. To avoid a
fermion being transferred from the source to the drain through
the application of Û+ Û− , the action of the second gate is conditioned on the drain being empty,


iπ 
1 − b̂†− b̂− ψ̂† b̂+ − b̂†+ ψ̂ . (B3)
Û+ = e−iV̂+ ,
V̂+ =
2
Applying these gates to the state in Eq. (B1) leads to


(B4)
Û+ Û− |Ψ⟩ = c0 ψ̂† − c1 b̂†− b̂†+ |0⟩.
Now we perform a projective
P measurement of the occupation
of the reservoirs, N̂b = 12 α=± n̂α , with possible outcomes 0
and 1. For the outcome 0, the nonnormalized state after the
measurement is


1 − N̂b Û+ Û− |Ψ⟩ = c0 ψ̂† |0⟩ = ψ̂† b̂+ |Ψ⟩.
(B5)
The norm of this state
for this outcome to
E
D is the probability
occur, p0 = |c0 |2 = Ψ ψ̂† ψ̂ Ψ . For the outcome 1, the nonnormalized state after the measurement is
(B6)
N̂b Û+ Û− |Ψ⟩ = −c1 b̂†− b̂†+ |0⟩ = ψ̂b̂†− |Ψ⟩,
E
D
2
†
with probability p1 = |c1 | = Ψ ψ̂ψ̂ Ψ . In both cases,
through the measurement, the entangled state in Eq. (B4) collapses, and the dot and reservoirs become disentangled. The
reservoirs can then be reinitialized for the next measurement,
and we may consider the effect of the measurement process on
the dot alone. As desired, the states after the measurement in
Eqs. (B5) and (B6) as well as the corresponding probabilities
are equivalent to a generalized measurement with the measurement operators M̂± given above.
It remains to generalize this measurement process to an extended lattice system. This is achieved straightforwardly by
first selecting a lattice site l ∈ {1, . . . , L} with uniform probability 1/L and then carry out the generalized measurement at
this lattice site as described above. This is equivalent to the
generalized measurement with measurement
operators given
.√
in Eq. (15), where the factors 1 L and the corresponding
factors of 1/L in the probabilities in Eq. (8) can be interpreted
as resulting from randomly picking a lattice site.

Generalized occupation measurements

The effect of a generalized measurement described by
Eq. (16) on a single quantum dot is trivial. Therefore, we
consider the general case of N particles on L lattice sites,
coupled to L drain states with annihilation operators b̂−,l ,
but only a single source mode with annihilation operator b̂+ .
Note that this is different from the derivation of the stochastic Schrödinger equation discussed in Appendix A 2 and the
sketch in Fig. 1. The initial state is a superposition of states
with N fermions on sites l1 , . . . , lN ∈ {1, . . . , L}, with respective amplitudes ψl1 ,...,lN ,

 N
X
Y †  †
(B7)
ψ̂  b̂+ |0⟩.
|Ψ⟩ =
ψl1 ,...,lN 
l1 <···<lN

n=1

ln

There is a single fermion in the source mode, while the drain
states are empty. As above, to implement the measurement,
we first entangle the system with the reservoirs. We apply a
unitary gate that transfers the fermion from the source to the
drain state at the sites l, conditioned on the corresponding sites
in the system being occupied,
Û = e−iV̂ ,

L

V̂ =


iπ X  †
n̂l b̂−,l b̂+ − b̂†+ b̂−,l .
√
2 N l=1

(B8)

Consequently, in each term in the sum in Eq. (B7), the reservoir fermion ends up in an equal superposition of the sites ln
that are occupied in the system,
 N
 N
Y †  X
1 X

ψl1 ,...,lN 
(B9)
Û|Ψ⟩ = √
ψ̂ln 
b̂†−,ln |0⟩.
N l1 <···<lN
n=1
n=1
Next, we perform a projective measurement of the position of the fermion in the drain, described by the operaPL
tor X̂− = l=1
lb̂†− b̂− , with possible measurement outcomes
l ∈ {1, . . . , L}. For the result l, the state after the measurement
is

 N
Y †  †
1 X
†

ψ̂ln  b̂−,l |0⟩
b̂−,l b̂−,l Û|Ψ⟩ = √
δl∈{l1 ,...,lN } ψl1 ,...,lN 
N l1 <···<lN
n=1
1
= √ n̂l b̂†−,l b̂+ |Ψ⟩,
N

(B10)

where the factor δl∈{l1 ,...,lN } indicates that only those terms
should be retained in the sum over occupied sites l1 , . . . , lN , for
which l is occupied. The probability for the outcome l, given
by the norm of the state, evaluates to pl = ⟨Ψ|n̂l |Ψ⟩/N. Focusing again on the effect of the measurement on the system,
we see that it can equivalently be described as a generalized
measurement with measurement operators given in Eq. (16).
C.

Telegraph-reduced autocorrelation function

The telegraph-reduced autocorrelation function, Eq. (18),
can be calculated analytically in the limit γ ≫ J. For simplicity of notation, we assume that the evolution has already

29
reached a stationary state at t′ = 0. A closed equation of motion can be obtained for the correlation function defined as
Ql1 ,l2 ,l3 (t) = ql1 ,l2 ,l3 (t)zl3 (0),
where

ql1 ,l2 ,l3 (t) = zl1 ,l2 (t)sl3 (t),
(C1)

to Ql1 ,l2 ,l3 (t) at order |l1 − l3 | + |l2 − l3 |. Therefore, the leading
correction to the zeroth order result is obtained by setting the
right-hand side of Eq. (C8) to zero, keeping only contributions
involving Ql,l,l (t) and Ql,l±1,l (t), which leads to
Ql,l±1,l (t) = −

zl,l′ (t) = 2Dl,l′ (t)−1,

zl (t) = zl,l (t),

sl (t) = (−1)

Nl (t)

, (C2)

with the single-particle density matrix defined in Eq. (13), and
Z t
X
Nl (t) =
dNl (t′ ),
dNl (t) =
dNα,l (t).
(C3)
0

α=±

The telegraph-reduced autocorrelation function, Eq. (18), is
obtained by setting l1 = l2 = l3 in Eq. (C1), Q(t) = Ql,l,l (t).
To obtain the evolution equation of Ql1 ,l2 ,l3 (t), we consider first
the stochastic increment in a single trajectory,
dql1 ,l2 ,l3 (t) = dzl1 ,l2 (t)sl3 (t) + zl1 ,l2 (t)dsl3 (t) + dzl1 ,l2 (t)dsl3 (t).
(C4)
The product of two increments in the last term yields a nonvanishing contribution: For Poisson processes, dtdNα,l (t) = 0,
but dNα,l (t)dNα′ ,l′ (t) = δα,α′ δl,l′ dNα,l (t) is nonzero [75]. To
obtain the increment dzl,l′ (t), we first rewrite the stochastic
Schrödinger equation (3) as a stochastic master equation for
the conditional state ρ̂(t) = |ψ(t)⟩⟨ψ(t)|. Then, using Wick’s
theorem, the latter can be recast as an equation for the singleparticle density matrix, which leads to
dzl,l′ (t) = −i [H, z(t)]l,l′ dt − 2

L "
X
Dl,m (t)Dm,l′ (t)

dN−,m (t)
Dm,m (t)
#


δl,m − Dl,m (t) δm,l′ − Dm,l′ (t)
−
dN+,m (t) , (C5)
1 − Dm,m (t)
m=1

with H defined in Eq. (41). We insert this result in Eq. (C4),
along with the expression for dsl (t) that follows from
sl (t + dt) = sl (t) (1 − 2dNl (t)) = sl (t) + dsl (t).

(C6)

Thus, with the averages of the Poisson increments dNα,l (t)
given in Sec. III, we obtain
dQl,l,l (t)


= 2J Im Ql,l+1,l (t) + Ql,l−1,1 (t) .
dt

(C7)

The equation of motion for Ql1 ,l2 ,l3 (t) with unequal indices has
an additional contribution proportional to γ; for example,
dQl,l±1,l

= iJ Ql+1,l±1,l (t) + Ql−1,l±1,l (t)
dt

−Ql,l±1−1,l (t) − Ql,l±1+1,l (t) − 2γQl,l±1,l . (C8)
Our goal is to solve these coupled equations of motion perturbatively in J ≪ γ. To zeroth order, from Eq. (C7), we obtain
Q(t) = Ql,l,l (t) = const.—by construction, Q(t) does not decay in the absence of coherent hopping. The decay of Ql,l,l (t)
is due to the coupling to Ql,l±1,l (t) at first order in J. More
generally, the commutator with H in Eq. (C5) couples Ql,l,l (t)

iJ
Q(t).
2γ

(C9)

Inserting this in Eq. (C7), and using Q(0) = 1, we obtain
Q(t) = e−2νt with ν = J 2 /γ as claimed in the main text.
D.

Regularization, causality structure, and normalization in
Keldysh field theory

Here, we address points (i) and (ii) listed below Eq. (49).
Furthermore, we discuss the causality structure and normalization of the Keldysh partition function in the replica limit.
1.

Regularization of the Keldysh action

(i) In the construction of the Keldysh functional integral,
in Eq. (38), time evolution from t0 to t is split into N time
steps of duration ∆t = (t − t0 )/N. At each discrete time
tn = t0 + ∆tn, a resolution of the identity in terms of coPR P L
†
herent states, |±ψ±,n ⟩ = e± r=1 l=1 ψ±,r,l,n ψ̂r,l |0⟩, where |0⟩ is the
vacuum state, is inserted. If a measurement is performed between times tn and tn+1 , we thus obtain a matrix element of
the measurement operator between the coherent states |ψ±,n ⟩
and |ψ±,n+1 ⟩. For generalized occupation measurements with
measurement operators given in Eq. (16), the matrix elements
on the forward and backward branches contain the factors
ψ+,n+1 |n̂r,l |ψ+,n = ψ∗+,r,l,n+1 ψ+,r,l,n ψ+,n+1 |ψ+,n ,
−ψ−,n |n̂r,l | − ψ−,n+1 = ψ∗−,r,l,n ψ−,r,n+1,l −ψ−,n | − ψ−,n+1 ,
(D1)
where the fields that represent the operators n̂r,l are one discrete time step apart. However, as shown in Ref. [37], in the
functional integral, we can replace
ψ∗+,r,l,n+1 ψ+,r,l,n → ψ∗+,r,l,n ψ+,r,l,n + 1,
ψ∗−,r,l,n ψ−,r,l,n+1 → ψ∗−,r,l,n ψ−,r,l,n + 1,

(D2)

where now the fields are evaluated at equal times. This is a
prerequisite for introducing fermionic bilinears at equal times
as new variables. The vertex in Eq. (48) is thus modified as
V[ψ∗ , ψ] =



1 ∗
ψ+ ψ+ + 1 ψ∗− ψ− + 1 .
n

(D3)

For fermion counting, with the linear measurement operators
in Eq. (15), this issue does not arise.
(ii) In the discrete-time formulation
D of the
E theory, the
Green’s function is defined as iGn,n′ = ψn ψ†n′ [104]. Working in the basis introduced through the Larkin-Ovchinnikov
rotation, Eq. (50), the continuous-time limit is given by
!
i
′
′
′
G(t, t ) = lim
Gn,n + δn,n σ x ,
(D4)
n,n′ ,N→∞
2

30
where the limit is taken such that tn → t and tn′ → t′ . In
the last term, we leave the identity matrices in replica and lattice space implicit. The shift iδn,n′ σ x /2 on the right-hand side
leads to the continuous-time Green’s function at equal times
being given by the symmetrized limit as in Eq. (49),
G(t, t) =


1
G(t, t + 0+ ) + G(t, t − 0+ ) .
2

(D5)

In turn, this implies that the Keldysh Green’s function is continuous at t = t′ , and that the anti-Keldysh component of the
Green’s function vanishes at all times—which is not the case
for the discrete-time Green’s function Gn,n′ that has a nonvanishing anti-Keldysh component at n = n′ [104].
For most applications of Keldysh field theory, the shift on
the right-hand side of Eq. (D4) is irrelevant and can be omitted. However, here we have to take it into account to ensure
normalization of the Keldysh partition function as discussed
below. The shift can be incorporated in the action by switching to a regularization in which the free discrete-time Green’s
(reg)
function is Gn,n′ = Gn,n′ + iδn,n′ σ x /2 [41]. Changing the regularization is achieved through the following relation:
Z
D[ψ∗ , ψ] i(ψ† G−1 ψ+γ R d2 x LM [ψ∗ ,ψl ])
0
l

e
ZR (t) =
Det −iG−1
0
Z
 (D6)

R
(reg)−1
(reg)
D[ψ∗ , ψ]
i ψ† G 0
ψ+γ d2 x L M [ψ∗l ,ψl ]


,
e
=
(reg)−1
Det −iG0
where we make the determinants that are usually absorbed in
the integration measure explicit [104]. The regularized measurement Lagrangian can be constructed order by order in an
(reg)
expansion in γ. To first order, L M is obtained by adding the
sum
over
E all partial contractions, where each contraction is
D
†
ψn ψn′ = δn,n′ σ x /2, to the original measurement Lagrangian
L M . Since these contractions are diagonal in replica space,
they can be added to each factor of the product over replicas
in Eq. (46), that is, to the vertices Eqs. (47) and (D3). As
stated in the main text, the vertices for fermion counting do
not change under the regularization. The regularized vertex
for occupation measurements is given in Eq. (52).

2.

Causality structure and normalization of the Keldysh
partition function

In Keldysh field theory for closed systems, the normalization of the partition function is reflected in the causality structure of the action, in particular, in the property that the action
vanishes for ψ+ = ψ− and ψ∗+ = ψ∗− [103–106]. To see this, we
consider a system with
partition
R Hamiltonian Ĥ. The Keldysh
Rt
∗
iS
′
function is Z(t) = D[ψ , ψ] e where S = t dt L[ψ∗ , ψ],
0
and with the Lagrangian
X 

L[ψ∗ , ψ] =
σ ψ†σ ∂t ψσ − H[ψ∗σ , ψσ ] .
(D7)
σ=±

From Z(t) = tr(ρ̂(t)) = 1 it follows that
X D
E
∂t Z = i ⟨L[ψ∗ , ψ]⟩ = i
σ ψ†σ ∂t ψσ − H[ψ∗σ , ψσ ] = 0.
σ=±

(D8)
Upon taking the sum over σ = ±, both terms in the average
vanish individually. Indeed, the cyclic property of the trace
implies that the expectation value of any operator Ô at time t
can be evaluated equivalently on the forward and on the backward branch of the Keldysh contour, and, therefore,
D
E
(D9)
⟨L[ψ∗ , ψ]⟩ = L[ψ∗ , ψ] |ψ+ =ψ− ,ψ∗+ =ψ∗− .
Then, ⟨L[ψ∗ , ψ]⟩ = 0 follows for the Lagrangian of a closed
system in Eq. (D7) from the causality structure,
L[ψ∗ , ψ] |ψ+ =ψ− ,ψ∗+ =ψ∗− = 0.

(D10)

This shows that the causality structure of the action guarantees
the normalization of the Keldysh partition function.
As mentioned in Sec. V C, the term ψ∗2 ψ1 in the regularized
vertex for occupation measurements, Eq. (52), violates the
usual causality structure. Inverting the Larkin-Ovchinnikov
rotation, Eq. (50), shows that this term couples the forward
and backward branches. The above argument based on the
cyclic property of the trace does, in general, not apply, and
Eqs. (D9) and (D10) do not hold for such terms. To see that
the partition function is normalized even though the action
does not obey the usual causality structure, one should note
that according to Eq. (D8), normalization is ensured when the
expectation value of the Lagrangian vanishes. We will now
confirm that this condition is met.
The free evolution described by the first term in the Keldysh
action in Eq. (45) obeys the causality structure for any value of
R, and, therefore, we only need to consider the measurement
Lagrangian Eq. (46). For R = 1, we thus require
X
(D11)
⟨iL M [ψ∗ , ψ]⟩ =
⟨Vn [ψ∗ , ψ]⟩ − 1 = 0.
n=±

For closed quantum systems undergoing unitary dynamics
without measurements, the Keldysh partition function is normalized to unity, Z(t) = tr(ρ̂(t)) = 1, as follows from the normalization of the density matrix ρ̂(t). However, the replica
Keldysh partition function ZR (t) is defined in Eq. (38) in terms
of R copies of the nonnormalized density matrix D̂(t). In the
replica limit R → 1, the completeness relation of measurement operators implies again that ZR (t) → 1. For R > 1, on
the other hand, the replica Keldysh partition function is not
normalized. This is because the products of measurement operators over r replicas, which occur in ⊗Rr=1 D̂r (t), do not obey
a completeness relation.

We first check this condition for fermion counting. Using the
form of the vertices given in Eq. (51), we obtain
D
E
h
i
A
iL M [ψ∗l , ψl ] = i GRl,l (t, t) − Gl,l
(t, t) − 1.
(D12)
To evaluate the Green’s functions at equal times, we express
them through fermionic field operators [103]:
oE
D
E
Dn
iGRl,l′ (t, t′ ) = ψ1,l (t)ψ∗1,l′ (t′ ) = θ(t − t′ ) ψ̂l (t), ψ̂†l′ (t′ ) ,
oE
D
E
Dn
A
′
∗
′
′
iGl,l
ψ̂l (t), ψ̂†l′ (t′ ) ,
′ (t, t ) = ψ2,l (t)ψ2,l′ (t ) = −θ(t − t)
D
E Dh
iE
K
′
∗
′
iGl,l
ψ̂l (t), ψ̂†l′ (t′ ) ,
′ (t, t ) = ψ1,l (t)ψ2,l′ (t ) =
(D13)

31
where two-time averages are defined as in Eq. (20). The values of the Green’s functions in the symmetrized limit of equal
times, Eq. (D5), follow directly from fermionic anticommutation relations and the expectation value ⟨n̂l ⟩ss in the unconditional steady state. According to Sec. III A, ⟨n̂l ⟩ss = n for
occupation measurements, with n = 1/2 for fermion counting
with equal rates of loss and gain. We thus obtain
1
′
iGR/A
l,l′ (t, t) = ± 2 δl,l ,

space, we consider


−1
trK RΦ τ± ARΦ
∞ n
∞ n
X

 X

i n
i
=
trK AnΦσx /2 τ± A =
AΦ/2 trK σnx τ± A
n!
n!
n=0
n=0
=

K
iGl,l
′ (t, t) = (1 − 2n) δl,l′ .

(D14)

n=0

D
E 1 1 i
A
iL M [ψ∗l , ψl ] =
− G K (t, t) + GRl,l (t, t)Gl,l
(t, t) − 1,
n 4 2 l,l
(D15)
where now the Green’s functions are those of the system without measurements.
However,
Eq. (D14) still applies, and we
D
E
again find iL M [ψ∗l , ψl ] = 0.
#

h 
i
h 
i
−1
−1
detR trK τ± RΦ GRΦ
= detR trK RΦ τ± e∓iΦ GRΦ
h


i
= detR e±iΦ/2 trK τ± e∓iΦ G e∓iΦ/2


(E3)
= detR e∓iΦ detR [trK (τ± G)] = detR [trK (τ± G)] ,
−1
showing that the transformation G 7→ RΦ GRΦ
is indeed a
symmetry of Eq. (55) for R > 1.
The above derivation relies on τ± being invariant under
multiplication by σ x . This invariance does not apply to multiplication by σy or σz . Therefore, rotations with σ x replaced by
σy or σz are not symmetries of the measurement Lagrangian.

2.
E.

The symmetry underlying the NLSM

In the following, we first show that rotations of the form
RΦ = eiΦσx /2 , with a traceless Hermitian matrix Φ, are a symmetry of the measurement Lagrangian for fermion counting,
Eq. (55). Then, we derive this symmetry of the Lagrangian
from a strong symmetry of the superoperator that describes
the time evolution of the R-replica nonnormalized density matrix [107, 108]. This derivation leads to conditions (i) and
(ii) for the symmetry to occur given in Sec. V D. Finally, we
discuss modifications of the theory for inefficient detection,
which lead to a breaking of the symmetry and thus show that
also condition (iii) is necessary.

1.

Symmetry of the measurement Lagrangian under RΦ

To show that rotations of the form RΦ are a symmetry of the
measurement Lagrangian for fermion counting, Eq. (55), we
first perform two auxiliary calculations. We define the adjoint
action of a matrix A on a matrix B as AA B = [A, B]. Then,
−1
RΦ
τ± RΦ =

∞
X
(−i)n
n=0

n!

AnΦσx /2 τ± =

∞
X
(∓iΦ)n
n=0

n!

n!

(E2)

AnΦ/2 trK (τ± A) = e±iΦ/2 trK (τ± A)e∓iΦ/2 ,



These two results and detR e∓iΦ = e∓i trR (Φ) = 1 lead to

D
E
Inserting these values in Eq. (D12) yields iL M [ψ∗l , ψl ] = 0,
confirming that the Keldysh partition function is normalized.
Finally, we check Eq. (D11) for occupation measurements.
Since the regularized vertex Eq. (52) is quartic, the expectation value in Eq. (D11) cannot be evaluated exactly. At lowest
order in γ, we can use Wick’s theorem to obtain
"

∞
X
(±i)n

τ± = τ± e∓iΦ ,
(E1)

where we have used that τ± is invariant—up to a change of
sign—under multiplication by σ x from both the left and the
right, σ x τ± = ±τ± and τ± σ x = ∓τ± , which can be combined
to Aσx τ± = ±2τ± . Next, for a matrix A in Keldysh and replica

Derivation from a superoperator symmetry

We next derive the symmetry of the Keldysh action under
RΦ = eiΦσx /2 from the operator formalism. We proceed in two
steps: First, we discuss the different types of symmetries associated with the transformation ĜΦ introduced in Eq. (66).
In particular, we distinguish weak and strong symmetries of
the superoperator that describes the time evolution of the Rreplica nonnormalized density matrix, and explain how they
are related to particle number conservation [106–108]. Second, we show that the symmetry of the Keldysh action under
RΦ results the strong symmetry of the superoperator under
ĜΦ .
a.

Symmetries of the time evolution superoperator

We first want to understand under which conditions the unitary operator ĜΦ defined in Eq. (66)
Q is a symmetry of the time
evolution operator for R replicas, Rr=1 V̂r (t). Each factor V̂r (t)
is of the form given in Eq. (33), and comprises both coherent
dynamics and measurements.
For generality, let us consider coherent evolution
generated
Q
by a generic quadratic Hamiltonian. Then, Rr=1 V̂r (t) contains
an R-replica Hamiltonian of the form
ĤR =

R X
L 
X
r=1 l,l′ =1


−Jl,l′ ψ̂†r,l ψ̂r,l′ + ∆l,l′ ψ̂r,l ψ̂r,l′ + H.c. .

(E4)

The action of ĜΦ on fermionic field operators is given by
Ĝ†Φ ψ̂r,lĜΦ =

R
X
r′ =1

Gr,r′ ψ̂r′ ,l ,

G = eiΦ/2 .

(E5)

32
It is thus straightforward to see that particle-number conserving terms in the Hamiltonian are symmetric under ĜΦ . In contrast, pairing terms are not symmetric. Such pairing terms are
contained in the Majorana model of Ref. [44].
We next consider measurements. As above, for the sake
of generality, we allow more generic types of measurement
operators than those considered in the main text. Our only requirement is that each replica is at all times in a pure Gaussian
state with a fixed number of particles—these properties are
also preserved by coherent evolution generated by a particlenumber conserving quadratic Hamiltonian. Such states are
Slater determinants as given for R replicas in Eq. (65). The
above requirement is thus satisfied if each measurement operator maps an N-particle Slater determinant to an N + ∆Nparticle Slater determinant, where the integer ∆N may depend
on the measurement operator. For the operators in Eq. (16)
that describe generalized measurements of occupation measurements, ∆N = 0, whereas for fermion counting with measurement operators given in Eq. (15), ∆N = −1 and ∆N = +1
for the measurement operators M̂−,l and M̂+,l , respectively.
Consider now a generic measurement operator
Q M̂ that satisfies this requirement. We want to infer how Rr=1 M̂r transforms under ĜΦ . In fact, for our purposes it is sufficient
to deQ
termine the transformation of the restriction of Rr=1 M̂r to the
space spanned by R-replica Slater determinants that are symmetric under permutations of replicas as given in Eq. (65).
This is because by construction of the replica formalism in
Sec. V B, the initial R-replica state is symmetric under permutations of replicas, and this property is conservedQ
due to the
product structure of the time evolution operator, Rr=1 V̂r (t).
Combined with the above assumptions on preservation of
Gaussianity Q
and a fixed number of particles in each replica,
we see that Rr=1 M̂r maps permutation-symmetric R-replica
N-particle Slater determinants to permutation-symmetric Rreplica N + ∆N-particle Slater determinants.
As a preliminary step, we consider the transformation of
the product of field operators over the replica index,
 R

R
R
R X
R
X
Y
Y
Y 
† 
Gr,rr′ ψ̂rr′ ,l .
Ĝ 
ψ̂r,l  ĜΦ =
Gr,r′ ψ̂r′ ,l =
Φ

r=1

r=1 r′ =1

r1′ ,...,rR′ =1 r=1

(E6)
The product in the last equality can be split into two independent products. A further
Q simplification is due to fermionic
statistics: The product Rr=1 ψ̂rr′ ,l is nonzero only if all replica
indices rr′ are different, that is, if rr′ = σr where σ ∈ SR
is an element of the symmetric group of permutations of
R
upon rearranging the product we obtain
QRelements. Then, Q
R
ψ̂
=
sgn(σ)
σ
,l
r
r=1
r=1 ψ̂r,l . We thus find
 R

 R
 R

X
Y 
Y
 Y 
† 
Ĝ 
ψ̂r,l  ĜΦ =
sgn(σ)  Gr,σr  
ψ̂r,l 
Φ

r=1

σ∈SR

= det(G)

r=1

R
Y
r=1

r=1

ψ̂r,l = ei trR (Φ)/2

R
Y

(E7)
ψ̂r,l ,

r=1

which shows that the product of field operators is invariant
under the transformation ĜΦ if trR (Φ) = 0. Otherwise, the
product acquires a phase factor.

We next consider the action of ĜΦ on a permutationsymmetric R-replica N-particle Slater determinant as given in
Eq. (65). With the above results, we can straightforwardly
deduce the action of Ĝ†Φ on this state:
Ĝ†Φ |ψR,N ⟩ = sN,R
= sN,R

N Y
R X
L
Y
n=1 r=1 l=1
N Y
R X
R
Y

ψl,nĜ†Φ ψ̂†r,lĜΦ |0⟩
G∗r,r′

n=1 r=1 r′ =1
−iN trR (Φ)/2
=e
|ψR,N ⟩.

L
X
l=1

ψl,n ψ̂†r,l |0⟩

(E8)

In the first equality, we have used that Ĝ†Φ |0⟩ = |0⟩, and that
exchanging the order of products over r and n in Eq. (65) leads
merely to a sign factor sN,R = (−1)N(N−1)R(R−1)/4 ; in the second
equality, we have employed Eq. (E5); finally, proceeding as in
Eq. (E7) establishes the third equality.
QRAs explained above, we may focus on the restriction of
r=1 M̂r to a map from R-replica N-particle Slater determinants |ψR,N ⟩, Eq. (65), to the same type of state but with N+∆N
particles. Under this restriction and with Eq. (E8), we thus
find
 R

R
Y
Y 
† 

Ĝ 
M̂r  ĜΦ = e−i∆N trR (Φ)/2
M̂r .
(E9)
Φ

r=1

r=1

This
Qresult clarifies under which conditions ĜΦ is a symmetry
of Rr=1 M̂r : It is always a symmetry if ∆N = 0, that is, if
measurements preserve the number of particles. In contrast,
if measurements change
Q the number of particles and ∆N , 0,
ĜΦ is a symmetry of Rr=1 M̂r only for trR (Φ) = 0.
QRReturning now to the full time evolution described by
r=1 V̂(t) that includes both measurements
Q and coherent dynamics, we see that ĜΦ is a symmetry of Rr=1 V̂(t) if both the
Hamiltonian and measurements conserve the number of particles. If the Hamiltonian is particle-number conserving but
measurements change the number of particles by an integer
∆N, ĜΦ is a symmetry of the dynamics only for trR (Φ) = 0.
Finally, ĜΦ is not a symmetry if particle-number conservation
is broken by the Hamiltonian.
Q
So far, weQhave focusedQon Rr=1 V̂r (t). However, in
Eq. (38), both Rr=1 V̂r (t) and Rr=1 V̂r (t)† appear, acting on the
initial density matrix ρ̂R,0 = ⊗Rr=1 ρ̂0,r from the left- and righthand-side, respectively. Therefore, we next study symmetries
of the superoperator V(t) defined by
 R
  R

Y
 Y

†



V(t)ρ̂ = 
V̂r (t) ρ̂ 
V̂r (t)  ,
r=1

(E10)

r=1

such that Eq. (38) can be written as
X


ZR (t) =
tr V(t)ρ̂R,0 .

(E11)

{αm ,lm ,tm }

For a superoperator V(t), one distinguishes between weak and
strong symmetries [107, 108]: The unitary operator ĜΦ is a
weak symmetry if V(t) is invariant under the simultaneous

33
transformation with ĜΦ and Ĝ†Φ from the left- and right-hand
side, respectively. That is, defining the superoperator GΦ as
this simultaneous transformation, GΦ ρ̂ = ĜΦ ρ̂Ĝ†Φ , the weak
symmetry condition reads [V(t), GΦ ] = 0. In contrast, ĜΦ
is a strong symmetry if V(t) is invariant under independent
transformations to on the left- and right-hand-sides. Defining G+,Φ ρ̂ = ĜΦ ρ̂ and G−,Φ ρ̂ = ρ̂Ĝ†Φ , the
 strong symmetry

condition
can
be
stated
equivalently
as
V(t), G+,Φ = 0 or


V(t), G−,Φ = 0. Evidently, the strong symmetry condition
implies the weak symmetry condition. To check for both possibilities at the same time, we consider
G†−,Φ− G†+,Φ+ V(t)G+,Φ+ G−,Φ− ρ̂
 R

Y

† 
= Ĝ 
V̂r (t) ĜΦ ρ̂Ĝ†
Φ+

+

r=1

Φ−

 R

Y

†
V̂r (t)  ĜΦ

r=1

−

i∆N

In the last equality, we have used Eq. (E9). However, here we
denote by ∆N the total change of the number of particles in
a single replica due to the measurement operators included in
V̂(t). The transformation of V(t) in the first line in Eq. (E12)
is a symmetry if the phase factor in the last equality reduces to
unity. This is the case for Φ+ = Φ− , which shows that ĜΦ is a
weak symmetry for any value of trR (Φ). To check whether ĜΦ
is also a strong symmetry, we may set Φ = Φ+ and Φ− = 0.
Then, the phase factor evaluates to unity and ĜΦ is a strong
symmetry if measurements conserve the number of particles,
∆N = 0. However, even if ∆N , 0, there is still a strong
SU(R) symmetry described by ĜΦ with trR (Φ) = 0. As we
show next, this last symmetry underlies the NLSM.
Connection between operator and Keldysh formulations

The weak and strong symmetries of V(t) are directly related to symmetries of Keldysh action. To establish this connection, we start from the Keldysh partition function given in
Eq. (E11). We assume that V(t) obeys the symmetry condition Eq. (E12) with the phase factor on the right-hand side
evaluating to unity. Then, the Keldysh partition function can
be expressed in terms of transformed operators as
ZR (t) =

X
{αm ,lm ,tm }

ψ± 7→ GΦ± ψ± ,

 R

Y †



tr ĜΦ+ V̂r (t)ĜΦ+ 
r=1

 R

Y †

†

×ρ̂R,0  ĜΦ− V̂r (t) ĜΦ−  . (E13)
r=1

The operators G†Φ+ and G†Φ− can be pulled through V̂r (t) and
V̂r (t)† , respectively, by transforming all field operators that
appear in V̂r (t) and V̂r (t)† according to Eq. (E5). Using the resulting expression as the starting point for the construction of
the Keldysh functional integral representation as in Eq. (39),
we find the same action as in Eq. (45), but with transformed
fields. Leaving matrix multiplication in replica space and the

ψ†± 7→ ψ†±G†Φ± .

(E14)

We thus see that the weak symmetry of V(t) corresponds to
the symmetry of the Keldysh action under identical transformations of fields on the forward and backward branches.
In contrast, the strong symmetry of V(t) for ∆N = 0 or
trR (Φ) = 0 is reflected in the symmetry of the Keldysh action under independent transformations on the forward and
backward branches [106].
Finally, we perform a Larkin-Ovchinnikov transformation
of the fields, Eq. (50). At the same time, we transform the
matrices Φ± as
Φ̄ =

(E12)

= e− 2 [trR(Φ+ )−trR(Φ− )] V(t)ρ̂.

b.

lattice site index implicit, the transformation of fields is

1
(Φ+ + Φ− ) ,
2

Φ=

1
(Φ+ − Φ− ) .
2

(E15)

⊺

Then, for ψ = (ψ1 , ψ2 ) , Eq. (E14) becomes
ψ 7→ e 2 (Φ̄+Φσx ) ψ.
i

(E16)

In this formulation, we see that the weak symmetry of V(t)
under ĜΦ implies symmetry with Φ̄ = Φ+ = Φ− and Φ = 0;
the strong symmetry implies the additional symmetry of the
Keldysh action under transformations with Φ = Φ+ = −Φ− .
For Φ̄ = 0, these are just the desired rotations RΦ = eiΦσx /2 .
The above analysis shows that the SU(R) symmetry of the
Keldysh action under rotations of the form RΦ = eiΦσx /2 is
a consequence of the strong SU(R) symmetry of the time
evolution superoperator V(t) under the unitary transformation ĜΦ , Eq. (66), with trR (Φ) = 0. They key property of
V(t) which underlies this symmetry is that the dynamics described by V(t) are restricted to the space of permutationsymmetric R-replica N-particle Slater determinants, Eq. (E8).
As detailed above, this is the case for particle-number conserving quadratic Hamiltonians and measurements that map
N-particle Slater determinants to N + ∆N-particle Slater determinants. These requirements are formulated as condition
(i) in Sec. V D.
3.

Breaking of the symmetry due to inefficient detection

Finally, we elaborate on condition (ii) in Sec. V D, that the
outcomes of all measurements have to be recorded. To prove
the necessity of imposing this condition, we demonstrate the
breaking of the symmetry due to inefficient detection. As discussed, for example, in Ref. [75], inefficient detection can be
modeled by averaging over a finite fraction of the measurement outcomes. Here, we focus on fully inefficient detection,
as described by the unconditional dynamics of R replicas.
But for the moment, let us disregard measurements and focus on the Hamiltonian dynamics of an isolated system. The
total system is subdivided into two parts, the system of interest and a reservoir. Conservation of the total number of
particles is reflected, via the Noether theorem, in a global
continuous U(1) symmetry of the Hamiltonian. When we integrate out the reservoir to obtain a description of the system alone, the U(1) symmetry of the total system becomes

34
a strong or a weak U(1) symmetry of the system dynamics if particles cannot or can be exchanged between system
and reservoir, respectively [105, 106]. The former case is realized in the unconditional dynamics obtained by averaging
over the outcomes of occupation measurements; the latter case
applies to the unconditional dynamics under fermion counting. For a single replica, the relevant phase rotation symmetries are ψ± 7→ eiϕ± ψ± . The strong symmetry is equivalent
to invariance of the Keldysh action under this transformation
for arbitrary choices of ϕ+ and ϕ− . For the weak symmetry, invariance of the action is required only for ϕ+ = ϕ− .
Let us now consider the unconditional dynamics of R replicas under fermion counting. This is described by a contribution to the Keldysh action of the form given in Eq. (46),
but with
a sum instead of a product over replicas, that is,
PR 
∗
∗
∗
∗
ψ
+,r ψ−,r + ψ+,r ψ−,r = ψ+ ψ− − ψ− ψ+ . Evidently, this
r=1
term is symmetric under the transformation in Eq. (E14) with
Φ+ = Φ− , which generalizes the weak U(1) symmetry associated with conservation of the number of particles in the total
system to R replicas. However, the strong SU(R) symmetry
underlying the NLSM, given by Eq. (E14) with Φ+ = −Φ− , is
broken. The breaking of the latter symmetry can also be understood on the level of quantum states: In the unconditional
dynamics, an initially pure state with N particles evolves into
an incoherent mixture of states with different numbers of particles [107, 108]. However, as shown above, the strong SU(R)
symmetry requires the system to be in a pure state with a fixed
number of particles at all times.
These considerations show that the conservation of the total
number of particles in the system and reservoirs is not sufficient to guarantee the existence of a strong SU(R) symmetry.
An additional necessary requirement is that each exchange of
particles between the system and reservoirs has to be detected,
such that the system remains in a pure state.

F.

Fluctuation expansion of the Keldysh action

To obtain the variation of the Keldysh action with respect
to G and thereby find the saddle-point manifolds described by
Eqs. (70) and (71), and to derive the action that governs the
Gaussian theory discussed in Sec. VI, we perform an expansion of the Keldysh action around its saddle points.

1.

Fluctuation expansion of the measurement Lagrangian for
fermion counting

The existence of a manifold of saddle points rather than
just a single isolated saddle point is a direct consequence
of the symmetries of the action. Therefore, to establish the
full manifold, it is sufficient to show that a single point on
the manifold is indeed a saddle point. For the manifold described by Eqs. (68) and (70), a convenient choice is given
by Q = σz , where we omit the identity 1R in replica space for
brevity. We parametrize
 fluctuations around this configuration
as G = −i σz + δQG 2. Inserting this expression in Eq. (55),

we obtain
iL M =



1 X
detR 1 − i trK τα δQG − 1.
2R α=±

(F1)

By expanding the determinant using
det(1 + ϵX) = 1 + ϵ tr(X) −

i
 
ϵ2 h  2
tr X − tr(X)2 + O ϵ 3 , (F2)
2

we find, to zeroth and first order in δQG ,
iL(0)
M =

1
− 1,
2R−1

iL(1)
M =


1
tr σz δQG .
2R

(F3)

There are two contributions of second order. The first one is
 i
1 X h
iL(2,1)
= R+1
trR trK τα δQG 2
M
2
α=±
R



1 Xh
trK σz δQG,r,r′ trK σz δQG,r′ ,r
= − R+2
2
r,r′ =1

 
i
− trK σy δQG,r,r′ trK σy δQG,r′ ,r .

(F4)

For fixed replica indices r and r′ , δQG,r,r′ is a 2 × 2 matrix
in Keldysh space. To simplify Eq. (F4) we can, therefore, use
the following relation between determinants and traces of 2×2
matrices A and B:
det(A + B) = det(A) + det(B) + tr(A) tr(B) − tr(AB).

(F5)

This allows us to express the products of traces in Eq. (F4) as



trK σz δQG,r,r′ trK σz δQG,r′ ,r = trK σz δQG,r,r′ σz δQG,r′ ,r



− detK δQG,r,r′ + δQG,r′ ,r + detK δQG,r,r′ + detK δQG,r′ ,r ,
(F6)
and analogously for the terms involving σy . The terms that
contain detK cancel in the difference between terms involving
σz and σy in Eq. (F4). We thus obtain

2 
 
1
(F7)
iL(2,1)
= − R+2 tr σz δQG 2 − σy δQG .
M
2
The second contribution of second order reads

1 X 
iL(2,2)
=
−
trR trK τα δQG 2
M
R+1
2
α=±

2 

1 
= R+2 tr σz δQG 2 − tr σy δQG .
2

(F8)

Using the first-order contribution in Eq. (F3), we can derive
the saddle-point equation δS /δG = i2 δS /δQG = 0, leading
to Σ = γQ/2R−1 with Q = σz as expected.
2.

Fluctuation expansion of the measurement Lagrangian for
occupation measurements

To obtain the saddle-point manifold and derive the Gaussian theory of Sec. VI, it is sufficient to expand the measurement Lagrangian in fluctuations around a particular saddle

35
point, which can be chosen as Q = Λ for occupation measurements. However, the derivation of the NLSM for occupation measurements requires an expansion around Q0 given in
Eq. (101), which reduces to Q0 = Λ for Rϕ = Rθ = 1. From Λ
given in Eq. (69), Q0 inherits the properties Q20 = 1, trK (Q
0 ) =
0, and detK (Q0 ) = −1. Inserting G = −i Q0 + δQG 2 in
Eq. (56), we obtain
iL M =


1  
det 1 − σ x Q0 + δQG
R
(4n)

+ trK σ x δQG + 2R (1 − 2ρ0 ) − 1, (F9)

where ρ0 is defined in Eq. (107). A more convenient form for
the expansion of the determinant in δQG is given by


det 1 − σ x Q0 + δQG
h
i
= [− detK (σ x − Q0 )]R det 1 − (σ x − Q0 )−1 δQG . (F10)
To calculate the inverse (σ x − Q0 )−1 , we use the following relation, which is valid for any invertible 2 × 2 matrix A:
1
[tr(A) − A] .
A−1 =
det(A)

(F11)

Furthermore, using Eq. (F5), we obtain detK (σ x −Q0 ) = −4ρ0 .
We thus find


1
det 1 − σ x Q0 + δQG
R
(4n)
!
ρR
Q0 − σ x
δQG . (F12)
= R0 det 1 +
n
4ρ0
Then, employing Eq. (F2) to expand iL M to second order in
δQG , we obtain
iL(0)
M =

ρR0
2R
(1 − 2ρ0 ) − 1,
+
nR (4n)R

ρR−1



1
0
tr (Q0 − σ x ) δQG +
tr σ x δQG ,
iL(1)
=
M
R
R
4n
(4n)
(F13)
R−2 n
ρ0

2 o
(2,1)
iL M = −
tr (Q0 − σ x ) δQG ,
32nR
ρR−2 

iL(2,2)
= 0 R tr (Q0 − σ x ) δQG 2 .
M
32n
To show that Q = Λ is a saddle point, we can replace Q0
by Λ in the expansion above, leading to ρ0 = n. Then, the
solution to δS /δG = 0 is given by
(
"
# )
γ
1
Σ=
Λ− 1−
σx .
(F14)
2n
(4n)R−1
The Pauli matrix σ x in Keldysh space corresponds to a nonvanishing anti-Keldysh component of the self-energy and thus
violates the usual causality structure. However, in the replica
limit R → 1, the coefficient of σ x vanishes, and we recover
the expected causal result Σ = γQ/(2n) with Q = Λ.

3.

Expansion of the full action

Next, we expand the action Eq. (61) in fluctuations around
the particular saddle points given by Eq. (70) and (71) with
RΦ = Rϕ = 1. For simplicity, we set R = 1 in all numerical
factors. Then, fluctuations around the saddle points can be
parametrized as Σ = γ (Λ + δQΣ ) (2n), where n = 1/2 for
fermion counting or occupation measurements at half filling.
The saddle-point self-energy Σ = γΛ/(2n) obeys the familiar causality structure of propagators in
h Keldysh

i field the−1
ory. Therefore, at the saddle point, Tr ln G
= 0 and
Tr(GΣ) = 0 [104]. For fermion counting with A = 0 in
Eq. (61), this implies that iS 0(0) = 0. Furthermore, according
to Eq. (F3), also iL(0)
M = 0, so that the Keldysh action vanishes
at the saddle point, in agreement with the expected normalization ZR (t) = 1 of the Keldysh partition function in the replica
limit R → 1. For occupation measurements, the matrix A
in Eq. (60) involves an anti-Keldysh component, leading to a
nonvanishing contribution
iS 0(0) = i Tr(GA) = −

γLT
(1 − 2n) ,
2n

(F15)

where we have set G = Λ, L is the system size and T = t −
t0 is the total evolution time. However, this contribution is
cancelled by the measurement action: from Eq. (F13), with
ρ0 = n at the saddle point Q0 = Λ, we obtain
Z
γLT
(1 − 2n) ,
iγS (0)
=
iγ
d2 x L(0)
(F16)
M
M =
2n


such that i S 0(0) + iγS (0)
M = 0.
In an expansion around a saddle point, there is no contribution of first order. To second order in δQΣ , we find
!
1
1
(2)
iS 0 =
Tr
GδQΣGδQΣ − δQΣ δQG ,
(F17)
4τ0
2τ0
where τ0 = n/γ. The dressed Green’s function in momentum
space is defined as
h
i−1
Gq (ω) = ω − ξq + iΛ/(2τ0 )
(F18)
1
1
= GRq (ω) (1 + Λ) + GqA (ω) (1 − Λ) ,
2
2
where ξq = −2J cos(q) and retarded GR and advanced G A
Green’s functions are given by
GR/A
q (ω) =

1
.
ω − ξq ± i/(2τ0 )

(F19)

Indeed, as stated in the main text in Eq. (74), only the diffusion
A
block Bl (t) = GRl (t)G−l
(−t) contributes to Eq. (F17).
G.

Derivation of the NLSM

As explained in Sec. VII, the parametrization in Eqs. (99)
and (101) is chosen such that the symmetries of the action that

36
are broken spontaneously by the saddle point Q = Λ and thus
give rise to Goldstone modes appear explicitly. For fermion
counting, these are rotations of the form RΦ , Eq. (100); for
generalized occupation measurements, also rotations of the
form Rϕ , Eq. (102), are a symmetry of the action. The NLSM
describes fluctuations of the corresponding massless Goldstone modes, and is obtained by integrating out the massive
fluctuations described by Θ, θ, and, for fermion counting, ϕ.
To derive the NLSM, we first take the spatial continuum
limit, in which the matrix H defined in Eq. (41) is replaced
by a differential operator containing derivatives with respect
to a continuous spatial coordinate x. Inserting Eq. (98) in the
action in Eq. (61) and performing an expansion in spatial and
temporal derivatives yields a Lagrangian of the form [104]
#
"
γ
ν
1
(1 − 2n) , (G1)
iL0 [Q] = Tr ΛR−1 ∂t R − (∂ x Q)2 −
2
8
2n
where ν = 2nJ 2 /γ. In the term i Tr(GA) in Eq. (61), we have
neglected derivatives of R, which would be multiplied by an
additional small parameter A ∼ γ. Rotations of the form RΦ ,
Eq. (100), being a symmetry of the action and, in particular,
commuting with A, drop out of i Tr(GA). Then, expanding
i Tr(GA) in the massive mode Θ leads to terms of second order
γ, which should be dropped on our order of approximation.
The same reasoning can be repeated for the rotations given in
Eq. (102). Consequently, in Eq. (G1) we have replaced the
term i Tr(GA) by its value on the saddle point given in (F15).
The expansion of the derivative terms in Eq. (G1) in Θ is
detailed in Ref. [41] and yields
1
ν
ΛR0−1 ∂t R0 − (∂ x Q0 )2
2
8
h
i
1
+ trK (Q0 σz ) trR ΘU −1/2 (∂t U) U −1/2
4
h

i γ
(1 − 2n) , (G2)
− νρ0 (1 − ρ0 ) trR ∂ x U −1 (∂ x U) −
2n
"

Lagrangian for both models, drops out. For fermion counting,
RΦ is the only symmetry. Therefore, we can expand Q to
second order in the massive modes Θ, ϕ, and θ,
RΘ Q0 RΘ−1 = σz + δQ,
where
δQ = ϕσy −θσ x −

where R0 = Rϕ Rθ , U = eiΦ , and ρ0 is defined in Eq. (107).
We focus now for the moment on the replica-symmetric
sector of the theory, setting R = 1. Since θ is a massive mode
for both fermion counting and occupation measurements, we
expand L0 to second order in θ. Furthermore, we drop terms
that contain ∂t θ and ∂t ϕ and no other fields. Such terms contribute to the action only at the initial and final time. However,
these contributions vanish. We thus find, with f = 1 − 2n,
i
ν nh
1 − f2 + 2fθ
iL0 [Q0 ] = − (2 + f θ) θ∂t ϕ −
4  i
4

− 1 − f 2 θ2 (∂ x ϕ)2 − i2 f ( f − θ) (∂ x ϕ) (∂ x θ)
o fγ


+ 1 + f 2 (∂ x θ)2 −
. (G3)
2n
Returning to R > 1, we next consider the contribution from
the measurement Lagrangian, given in Eqs. (55) and (56) for
fermion counting and occupation measurements, respectively,
where we insert Eq. (98). The parametrization of rotations
in Eq. (99) is chosen such that RΦ , being a symmetry of the

ϕ2
Θ2
θ2
σz − σz − σz −Θ (σ x + σz θ) . (G5)
2
2
2

Then, using Eqs. (F3), (F7), and (F8), we obtain
iL M [Q] = −

i
1 h  2
trR Θ + θ2 + ϕ2 ,
2

(G6)

where we have set R = 1 in all numerical factors, such that
L(0)
M , given in Eq. (F3), vanishes.
For occupation measurements, also Rϕ is a symmetry.
Therefore, we cannot expand Q in ϕ as we did for fermion
counting, and Eqs. (G4) and (G5) have to be replaced by
RΘ Q0 RΘ−1 = Q0 + δQ,

(G7)

where
δQ =


i Θ2 
i h
Θ σy , Q 0 −
Q0 − σy Q0 σy .
2
4

(G8)

Inserting Eq. (G7) in Eq. (F13) we obtain an expansion of the
measurement Lagrangian in Θ,
iL M =

#

iL0 [Q] = Tr

(G4)

 
f
1
−
trK (σz Q0 )2 trR Θ2 .
2n 32nρ0

(G9)

To find the replica-symmetric Lagrangian for fermion
counting, we can simplify Eq. (G3) further by setting f = 0,
performing an expansion to second order in both ϕ and θ, and
omitting the last term that stems from i tr(GA). Then, combining Eq. (G3) with Eq. (G6) yields Eq. (103). For occupation
measurements, combining Eq. (G3) with Eq. (G9) we obtain
Eq. (104). In the replicon sector described by the modes Φ
and Θ, integration over Θ leads for both models to Eq. (105).
H.

Modified NLSM for particle-hole symmetric Hamiltonians

Through the gauge transformation ψ̂l 7→ il ψ̂l , the hopping
matrix H in Eq. (41) becomes purely imaginary, and obeys the
⊺
PHS condition H = −H . As we discuss here, PHS modifies
the target manifold of the NLSM [19, 51, 53]. We summarize
only the key steps in the derivation of the modified NLSM.
Details of the derivation will be presented elsewhere.
We begin by explicitly symmetrizing the action with respect
to PHS. Consider first the Hamiltonian contribution to the action in Eq. (40). After the above gauge transformation and the
Larkin-Ovchinnikov rotation, Eq. (50), this contribution can
be written as


1 †
1 
⊺
⊺
ψ Hψ + ψ Hψ∗ = Ψ̄HΨ,
ψ† Hψ = ψ† H − H ψ =
2
2
(H1)

37
where we have introduced the vectors of fields,
!


1
1 
ψ
⊺
⊺
Ψ= √
Ψ̄ = √ ψ† , ψ −iσy = Ψ C. (H2)
∗ ,
iσ
ψ
y
2
2
For fixed lattice site index l, the vectors Ψl (t) and Ψ̄l (t) have
4R components in the combined Keldysh, charge-conjugation,
and replica space. The charge-conjugation matrix is defined as
C = σy ⊗ σy , where the first and second factors of σy act in
Keldysh and charge-conjugation space, respectively, and the
identity in replica space is left implicit.
The matrices ±iσy in Eq. (H2) are not required to symmetrize the Hamiltonian contribution to the action. However,
for this definition of Ψ and Ψ̄, also the measurement vertices
in Eqs. (51) and Eq. (52) take forms that do not have any
structure in charge-conjugation space and are thus manifestly
particle-hole symmetric: For fermion counting, we obtain
V± [Ψ̄, Ψ] = iΨ̄τ± Ψ,

(H3)

with matrices τ± , which are defined below Eq. (55), acting in
Keldysh space; for generalized occupation measurements, we
can write the measurement vertex in the exponentiated form
V[Ψ̄, Ψ] =

1 2Ψ̄σx Ψ
e
,
4n

(H4)

Finally, also the action in Eq. (61) acquires a factor of β = 1/2,
n h 
o

i
iS 0 [G, Σ] = Tr β ln G−1 + iGA − iGΣ ,
(H7)
where A = 0 for fermion counting; for occupation measurements, A is defined in Eq. (60).
Next, we consider the saddle points of the particle-hole
symmetrized action. Equation (68) becomes G = −iβQ/2; in
contrast, the self-energy can still be expressed through Q as in
Eqs. (70) and (71). Note, however, that the replica-symmetric
saddle point, Q = Q0 ⊗1R , is now determined by a 4×4 matrix
Q0 in Keldysh and charge-conjugation space:
!
Λ
0
Q0 =
,
(H8)
⊺
0 −σy Λ σy
with Λ given in Eq. (69).
The target manifold of the NLSM can now be determined in
three steps: (i) Identify the group G of transformations Q 7→
RQR−1 that preserve Hermiticity as well as the generalized
⊺
skew-symmetry condition Q = −CQ C, and are symmetries
of the action. In Keldysh space, these transformations are
!
V
0
R=M
M,
(H9)
0 σy V∗ σy

(H6)



1
where M = √12 11 −1
is the matrix form of the LarkinOvchinnikov rotation, Eq. (50). For fermion counting, the
matrices V are in G = SU(2R); for occupation measurements,
conservation of the number of particles results in an enlarged
symmetry group G = U(2R) = U(1) ⋊ SU(R). (ii) Identify
the subgroup H ⊂ G of transformations that leave the saddle point Q0 invariant. This is the case for matrices V that
⊺
obey the condition V σy V = σy and thus form the compact symplectic group H = Sp(R). (iii) The target manifold of the NLSM is G/H. Focusing on the replicon sector of the theory, the target manifold of the NLSM for both
fermion counting and generalized occupation measurements
is thus SU(2R)/Sp(R). Crucially, also in the presence of PHS,
the target manifold of the replicon NLSM is not modified for
fermion counting as compared to models with a conserved
number of particles [51, 53]. Particle-number conservation
affects only the replica-symmetric sector: The U(1) NLSM
becomes massive when particle-number conservation is broken by fermion counting.

[1] B. Misra and E. C. G. Sudarshan, The Zeno’s paradox in quantum theory, J. Math. Phys. 18, 756 (1977).
[2] Y. Li, X. Chen, and M. P. A. Fisher, Quantum Zeno effect
and the many-body entanglement transition, Phys. Rev. B 98,
205136 (2018).
[3] B. Skinner, J. Ruhman, and A. Nahum, Measurement-Induced
Phase Transitions in the Dynamics of Entanglement, Phys.
Rev. X 9, 031009 (2019).
[4] M. Szyniszewski, Entanglement transition from variablestrength weak measurements, Phys. Rev. B 100, 064204
(2019).

[5] Y. Li, X. Chen, and M. P. A. Fisher, Measurement-driven entanglement transition in hybrid quantum circuits, Phys. Rev. B
100, 134306 (2019).
[6] Y. Bao, Theory of the phase transition in random unitary circuits with measurements, Phys. Rev. B 101, 104301 (2020).
[7] M. J. Gullans and D. A. Huse, Dynamical Purification Phase
Transition Induced by Quantum Measurements, Phys. Rev. X
10, 041020 (2020).
[8] X. Turkeshi, R. Fazio, and M. Dalmonte, Measurementinduced criticality in (2 + 1)-dimensional hybrid quantum circuits, Phys. Rev. B 102, 014315 (2020).

again with the matrix σ x acting in Keldysh space.
As for broken PHS, the next step is to perform a generalized
Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation. However, Eq. (54) has
to be modified to an integration over Hermitian 4R × 4R ma⊺
trices G and Σ that obey the condition G = −CG C, which
follows from G = −iΨΨ̄ and Eq. (H2). The measurement Lagrangian for fermion counting in Eq. (55) is thus replaced by
iL M =

X

n h



1

eβ trCR ln trK β τα G

io

− 1,

(H5)

α=±

where β = 1/2. Here and in the following, the corresponding
expressions for broken PHS are recovered by setting β = 1.
The measurement Lagrangian for occupation measurements,
Eq. (56), becomes
iL M =

1 β trhln 21 − βi σx Gi
i
+ 2R−1 R tr(σ x G) − 1.
e
nR
2
n

38
[9] A. Zabalo, M. J. Gullans, J. H. Wilson, S. Gopalakrishnan, D. A. Huse, and J. H. Pixley, Critical properties of the
measurement-induced transition in random quantum circuits,
Phys. Rev. B 101, 060301 (2020).
[10] Y. Bao, S. Choi, and E. Altman, Symmetry enriched phases of
quantum circuits, Ann. Phys. (N. Y). 435, 168618 (2021).
[11] M. Ippoliti, M. J. Gullans, S. Gopalakrishnan, D. A.
Huse, and V. Khemani, Entanglement Phase Transitions in
Measurement-Only Dynamics, Phys. Rev. X 11, 011030
(2021).
[12] A. Nahum, Measurement and Entanglement Phase Transitions
in All-To-All Quantum Circuits, on Quantum Trees, and in
Landau-Ginsburg Theory, PRX Quantum 2, 010352 (2021).
[13] A. Lavasani, Y. Alavirad, and M. Barkeshli, Measurementinduced topological entanglement transitions in symmetric
random quantum circuits, Nature Physics 17, 342 (2021).
[14] P. Sierant, M. Schirò, M. Lewenstein, and X. Turkeshi,
Measurement-induced phase transitions in (d +1)-dimensional
stabilizer circuits, Phys. Rev. B 106, 214316 (2022).
[15] A. Zabalo, M. J. Gullans, J. H. Wilson, R. Vasseur,
A. W. W. Ludwig, S. Gopalakrishnan, D. A. Huse, and
J. H. Pixley, Operator Scaling Dimensions and Multifractality at Measurement-Induced Transitions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128,
050602 (2022).
[16] X. Yu and X.-L. Qi, Measurement-Induced Entanglement Phase Transition in Random Bilocal Circuits,
arXiv:2201.12704 (2022).
[17] U. Agrawal, A. Zabalo, K. Chen, J. H. Wilson, A. C. Potter,
J. H. Pixley, S. Gopalakrishnan, and R. Vasseur, Entanglement
and Charge-Sharpening Transitions in U(1) Symmetric Monitored Quantum Circuits, Phys. Rev. X 12, 41002 (2022).
[18] F. Barratt, U. Agrawal, S. Gopalakrishnan, D. A. Huse,
R. Vasseur, and A. C. Potter, Field Theory of Charge Sharpening in Symmetric Monitored Quantum Circuits, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 129, 120604 (2022).
[19] C.-M. Jian, B. Bauer, A. Keselman, and A. W. W. Ludwig,
Criticality and entanglement in nonunitary quantum circuits
and tensor networks of noninteracting fermions, Phys. Rev. B
106, 134206 (2022).
[20] C.-M. Jian, H. Shapourian, B. Bauer, and A. W. W. Ludwig,
Measurement-induced entanglement transitions in quantum
circuits of non-interacting fermions: Born-rule versus forced
measurements, arXiv:2302.09094 (2023).
[21] H. Oshima and Y. Fuji, Charge fluctuation and charge-resolved
entanglement in a monitored quantum circuit with U(1) symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 107, 014308 (2023).
[22] S. P. Kelly, U. Poschinger, F. Schmidt-Kaler, M. P. A. Fisher,
and J. Marino, Coherence requirements for quantum communication from hybrid circuit dynamics, SciPost Physics 15,
250 (2023).
[23] Z. Weinstein, S. P. Kelly, J. Marino, and E. Altman, Scrambling transition in a radiative random unitary circuit, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 131, 220404 (2023).
[24] S. P. Kelly and J. Marino, Entanglement transitions induced by
quantum-data collection, Phys. Rev. A 111, L010402 (2025).
[25] X. Cao, A. Tilloy, and A. De Luca, Entanglement in a fermion
chain under continuous monitoring, SciPost Phys. 7, 024
(2019).
[26] X. Chen, Emergent conformal symmetry in nonunitary random dynamics of free fermions, Phys. Rev. Research 2,
033017 (2020).
[27] A. Nahum, Entanglement and dynamics of diffusionannihilation processes with Majorana defects, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 023288 (2020).

[28] O. Alberton, M. Buchhold, and S. Diehl, Entanglement Transition in a Monitored Free-Fermion Chain: From Extended
Criticality to Area Law, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 170602 (2021).
[29] Q. Tang, Quantum Criticality in the Nonunitary Dynamics of
(2 + 1)-Dimensional Free Fermions, Phys. Rev. B 103, 174303
(2021).
[30] M. Buchhold, Y. Minoguchi, A. Altland, and S. Diehl, Effective Theory for the Measurement-Induced Phase Transition of
Dirac Fermions, Phys. Rev. X 11, 041004 (2021).
[31] M. Van Regemortel, Z.-P. Cian, A. Seif, H. Dehghani, and
M. Hafezi, Entanglement Entropy Scaling Transition under Competing Monitoring Protocols, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126,
123604 (2021).
[32] M. Coppola, E. Tirrito, D. Karevski, and M. Collura, Growth
of entanglement entropy under local projective measurements,
Phys. Rev. B 105, 094303 (2022).
[33] F. Carollo and V. Alba, Entangled multiplets and unusual
spreading of quantum correlations in a continuously monitored tight-binding chain, Phys. Rev. B 106, L220304 (2022).
[34] B. Ladewig, S. Diehl, and M. Buchhold, Monitored open
fermion dynamics: Exploring the interplay of measurement,
decoherence, and free Hamiltonian evolution, Phys. Rev. Research 4, 033001 (2022).
[35] M. Buchhold, T. Müller, and S. Diehl, Revealing
measurement-induced phase transitions by pre-selection,
arXiv:2208.10506 (2022).
[36] X. Turkeshi, Enhanced entanglement negativity in boundarydriven monitored fermionic chains, Phys. Rev. B 106, 024304
(2022).
[37] Q. Yang, Y. Zuo, and D. E. Liu, Keldysh nonlinear sigma
model for a free-fermion gas under continuous measurements,
Phys. Rev. Res. 5, 033174 (2023).
[38] M. Szyniszewski, O. Lunt, and A. Pal, Disordered monitored
free fermions, Phys. Rev. B 108, 165126 (2023).
[39] H. Lóio, A. De Luca, J. De Nardis, and X. Turkeshi, Purification timescales in monitored fermions, Phys. Rev. B 108,
L020306 (2023).
[40] Y. Le Gal, X. Turkeshi, and M. Schirò, Volume-to-area law entanglement transition in a non-Hermitian free fermionic chain,
SciPost Physics 14, 138 (2023).
[41] I. Poboiko, P. Pöpperl, I. V. Gornyi, and A. D. Mirlin, Theory
of Free Fermions under Random Projective Measurements,
Phys. Rev. X 13, 041046 (2023).
[42] I. Poboiko, I. V. Gornyi, and A. D. Mirlin, MeasurementInduced Phase Transition for Free Fermions above One Dimension, Phys. Rev. Lett. 132, 110403 (2024).
[43] G. Kells, D. Meidan, and A. Romito, Topological transitions
in weakly monitored free fermions, SciPost Physics 14, 031
(2023).
[44] M. Fava, L. Piroli, T. Swann, D. Bernard, and A. Nahum,
Nonlinear Sigma Models for Monitored Dynamics of Free
Fermions, Phys. Rev. X 13, 041045 (2023).
[45] J. Merritt, Entanglement transitions with free fermions, Phys.
Rev. B 107, 064303 (2023).
[46] K. Klocke, Majorana Loop Models for Measurement-Only
Quantum Circuits, Phys. Rev. X 13, 041028 (2023).
[47] K. Chahine and M. Buchhold, Entanglement phases, localization, and multifractality of monitored free fermions in two dimensions, Phys. Rev. B 110, 054313 (2024).
[48] M. Eissler, I. Lesanovsky, and F. Carollo, Unraveling-induced
entanglement phase transition in diffusive trajectories of
continuously monitored noninteracting fermionic systems,
arXiv:2406.04869 (2024).
[49] L. Lumia, E. Tirrito, R. Fazio, and M. Collura, Measurement-

39
induced transitions beyond Gaussianity: A single particle description, Phys. Rev. Res. 6, 023176 (2024).
[50] M. Tsitsishvili, D. Poletti, M. Dalmonte, and G. Chiriacò,
Measurement induced transitions in non-Markovian free
fermion ladders, SciPost Phys. Core 7, 011 (2024).
[51] M. Fava, L. Piroli, D. Bernard, and A. Nahum, Monitored
fermions with conserved U(1) charge, Phys. Rev. Res. 6,
043246 (2024).
[52] H. Guo, M. S. Foster, C.-M. Jian, and A. W. W. Ludwig,
Field theory of monitored, interacting fermion dynamics with
charge conservation, arXiv:2410.07317 (2024).
[53] I. Poboiko, P. Pöpperl, I. V. Gornyi, and A. D. Mirlin,
Measurement-induced transitions for interacting fermions,
Phys. Rev. B 111, 024204 (2025).
[54] Y. Fuji, Measurement-induced quantum criticality under continuous monitoring, Phys. Rev. B 102, 054302 (2020).
[55] S. Goto and I. Danshita, Measurement-induced transitions of
the entanglement scaling law in ultracold gases with controllable dissipation, Phys. Rev. A 102, 033316 (2020).
[56] Q. Tang, Measurement-induced phase transition: A case study
in the nonintegrable model by density-matrix renormalization
group calculations, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 013022 (2020).
[57] E. V. H. Doggen, Generalized quantum measurements with
matrix product states: Entanglement phase transition and clusterization, Phys. Rev. Research 4, 023146 (2022).
[58] Y. Minoguchi, P. Rabl, and M. Buchhold, Continuous gaussian measurements of the free boson CFT: A model for exactly
solvable and detectable measurement-induced dynamics, SciPost Physics 12, 009 (2022).
[59] N. Lang, Entanglement transition in the projective transverse
field Ising model, Phys. Rev. B 102, 094204 (2020).
[60] D. Rossini, Measurement-induced dynamics of many-body
systems at quantum criticality, Phys. Rev. B 102, 035119
(2020).
[61] T. Botzung, S. Diehl, and M. Müller, Engineered dissipation
induced entanglement transition in quantum spin chains: From
logarithmic growth to area law, Phys. Rev. B 104, 184422
(2021).
[62] X. Turkeshi, Measurement-induced entanglement transitions
in the quantum Ising chain: From infinite to zero clicks, Phys.
Rev. B 103, 224210 (2021).
[63] Z. Weinstein, Nonlocality and entanglement in measured critical quantum Ising chains, Phys. Rev. B 107, 245132 (2023).
[64] Z. Yang, Entanglement in a one-dimensional critical state after
measurements, Phys. Rev. B 108, 165120 (2023).
[65] E. Tirrito, A. Santini, R. Fazio, and M. Collura, Full counting
statistics as probe of measurement-induced transitions in the
quantum Ising chain, SciPost Physics 15, 096 (2023).
[66] C. Noel, P. Niroula, D. Zhu, A. Risinger, L. Egan, D. Biswas,
M. Cetina, A. V. Gorshkov, M. J. Gullans, D. A. Huse, and
C. Monroe, Measurement-induced quantum phases realized
in a trapped-ion quantum computer, Nature Physics 18, 760
(2022).
[67] U. Agrawal, J. Lopez-Piqueres, R. Vasseur, S. Gopalakrishnan, and A. C. Potter, Observing Quantum Measurement Collapse as a Learnability Phase Transition, Phys. Rev. X 14,
041012 (2024).
[68] Google Quantum AI and Collaborators, Measurementinduced entanglement and teleportation on a noisy quantum
processor, Nature 622, 481 (2023).
[69] J. M. Koh, S.-N. Sun, M. Motta, and A. J. Minnich,
Measurement-induced entanglement phase transition on a superconducting quantum processor with mid-circuit readout,
Nature Physics 19, 1314 (2023).

[70] H. Kamakari, J. Sun, Y. Li, J. J. Thio, T. P. Gujarati, M. P. A.
Fisher, M. Motta, and A. J. Minnich, Experimental demonstration of scalable cross-entropy benchmarking to detect
measurement-induced phase transitions on a superconducting
quantum processor, arXiv:2403.00938 (2024).
[71] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and
Quantum Information, 10th ed. (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2012).
[72] C. Gardiner and P. Zoller, The Quantum World of Ultra-Cold
Atoms and Light Book I: Foundations of Quantum Optics,
Cold Atoms, Vol. 2 (Imperial College Press, London, 2014).
[73] C. Gardiner and P. Zoller, The Quantum World of Ultra-Cold
Atoms and Light Book II: The Physics of Quantum-Optical
Devices, Cold Atoms, Vol. 4 (Imperial College Press, London,
2015).
[74] K. Jacobs and D. A. Steck, A straightforward introduction to
continuous quantum measurement, Contemp. Phys. 47, 279
(2006).
[75] H. M. Wiseman and G. J. Milburn, Quantum Measurement
and Control, 1st ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2009).
[76] P. Di Francesco, P. Mathieu, and D. Sénéchal, Conformal Field
Theory, Graduate Texts in Contemporary Physics (Springer
New York, New York, NY, 1997).
[77] C. Gardiner, Stochastic Methods, 4th ed. (Springer Berlin,
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009).
[78] P. Calabrese and J. Cardy, Entanglement entropy and conformal field theory, J. Phys. A Math. Theor. 42, 504005 (2009).
[79] A. J. Daley, Quantum trajectories and open many-body quantum systems, Adv. Phys. 63, 77 (2014).
[80] S. Gustavsson, R. Leturcq, M. Studer, I. Shorubalko, T. Ihn,
K. Ensslin, D. C. Driscoll, and A. C. Gossard, Electron counting in quantum dots, Surface Science Reports 64, 191 (2009).
[81] E. Starchl and L. M. Sieberer, Relaxation to a Parity-Time
Symmetric Generalized Gibbs Ensemble after a Quantum
Quench in a Driven-Dissipative Kitaev Chain, Phys. Rev. Lett.
129, 220602 (2022).
[82] E. Starchl and L. M. Sieberer, Quantum quenches in drivendissipative quadratic fermionic systems with parity-time symmetry, Phys. Rev. Res. 6, 013016 (2024).
[83] D. S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, Simulation of Many-Body Fermi
Systems on a Universal Quantum Computer, Phys. Rev. Lett.
79, 2586 (1997).
[84] G. Ortiz, J. E. Gubernatis, E. Knill, and R. Laflamme, Quantum algorithms for fermionic simulations, Phys. Rev. A 64,
022319 (2001).
[85] S. B. Bravyi and A. Y. Kitaev, Fermionic quantum computation, Ann. Phys. (N. Y). 298, 210 (2002).
[86] R. C. Ball, Fermions without Fermion Fields, Phys. Rev. Lett.
95, 176407 (2005).
[87] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, Mapping local Hamiltonians of
fermions to local Hamiltonians of spins, J. Stat. Mech. Theory
Exp. 2005, P09012 (2005).
[88] J. D. Whitfield, J. Biamonte, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Simulation of electronic structure Hamiltonians using quantum computers, Mol. Phys. 109, 735 (2011).
[89] R. Barends, L. Lamata, J. Kelly, L. Garcı́a-Álvarez, A. G.
Fowler, A. Megrant, E. Jeffrey, T. C. White, D. Sank, J. Y. Mutus, B. Campbell, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth,
I.-C. Hoi, C. Neill, P. J. J. O’Malley, C. Quintana, P. Roushan,
A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, E. Solano, and J. M. Martinis, Digital quantum simulation of fermionic models with a superconducting circuit, Nat. Commun. 6, 7654 (2015).
[90] J. D. Whitfield, V. Havlı́ček, and M. Troyer, Local spin opera-

40
tors for fermion simulations, Phys. Rev. A 94, 030301 (2016).
[91] D. González-Cuadra, D. Bluvstein, M. Kalinowski,
R. Kaubruegger, N. Maskara, P. Naldesi, T. V. Zache,
A. M. Kaufman, M. D. Lukin, H. Pichler, B. Vermersch,
J. Ye, and P. Zoller, Fermionic quantum processing with
programmable neutral atom arrays, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
120, 1 (2023).
[92] D. Bernard, T. Jin, and O. Shpielberg, Transport in quantum
chains under strong monitoring, EPL (Europhysics Lett. 121,
60006 (2018).
[93] T. Chou, K. Mallick, and R. K. P. Zia, Non-equilibrium statistical mechanics: from a paradigmatic model to biological
transport, Reports Prog. Phys. 74, 116601 (2011).
[94] K. Mallick, The exclusion process: A paradigm for nonequilibrium behaviour, Phys. A Stat. Mech. its Appl. 418, 17
(2015).
[95] D. T. Gillespie, Stochastic simulation of chemical kinetics,
Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 58, 35 (2007), pMID:
17037977.
[96] G. L. Daquila and U. C. Täuber, Slow relaxation and aging
kinetics for the driven lattice gas, Phys. Rev. E 83, 051107
(2011).
[97] I. Klich and L. Levitov, Quantum Noise as an Entanglement
Meter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 100502 (2009).
[98] H. F. Song, C. Flindt, S. Rachel, I. Klich, and K. Le Hur, Entanglement entropy from charge statistics: Exact relations for
noninteracting many-body systems, Phys. Rev. B 83, 161408
(2011).
[99] H. F. Song, S. Rachel, C. Flindt, I. Klich, N. Laflorencie, and
K. Le Hur, Bipartite fluctuations as a probe of many-body entanglement, Phys. Rev. B 85, 035409 (2012).
[100] K. H. Thomas and C. Flindt, Entanglement entropy in dynamic quantum-coherent conductors, Phys. Rev. B 91, 125406
(2015).
[101] I. S. Burmistrov, K. S. Tikhonov, and I. V. Gornyi, Entanglement entropy and particle number cumulants of disordered
fermions, Ann. Phys. (N. Y). 383, 140 (2017).
[102] Strictly speaking, the tensor product of fermionic Fock spaces
is not well defined. However, one can give meaning to such
a tensor product by first mapping the fermionic Fock spaces
to bosonic ones through a Jordan-Wigner transformation, then
forming the tensor product of the bosonic spaces, and finally
reintroducing fermionic operators in the product space [44].
[103] A. Altland and B. D. Simons, Condensed Matter Field Theory, second edi ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2010).
[104] A. Kamenev, Field Theory of Non-Equilibrium Systems, 2nd
ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2023).
[105] L. M. Sieberer, M. Buchhold, and S. Diehl, Keldysh field theory for driven open quantum systems, Reports Prog. Phys. 79,
096001 (2016).

[106] L. M. Sieberer, M. Buchhold, J. Marino, and S. Diehl, Universality in driven open quantum matter, arXiv:2312.03073
(2023).
[107] B. Buča and T. Prosen, A note on symmetry reductions of the
Lindblad equation: transport in constrained open spin chains,
New J. Phys. 14, 073007 (2012).
[108] V. V. Albert and L. Jiang, Symmetries and conserved quantities in Lindblad master equations, Phys. Rev. A 89, 022118
(2014).
[109] S. Hikami, Three-loop ß-functions of non-linear σ models on
symmetric spaces, Phys. Lett. B 98, 208 (1981).
[110] F. Wegner, Four-loop-order β-function of nonlinear σ-models
in symmetric spaces, Nucl. Phys. B 316, 663 (1989).
[111] F. Evers and A. D. Mirlin, Anderson transitions, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 80, 1355 (2008).
[112] P. Calabrese and J. Cardy, Entanglement entropy and quantum
field theory, J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. 2004, P06002 (2004).
[113] I. Peschel and V. Eisler, Reduced density matrices and entanglement entropy in free lattice models, J. Phys. A Math. Theor.
42, 504003 (2009).
[114] M. M. Wolf, F. Verstraete, M. B. Hastings, and J. I. Cirac,
Area laws in quantum systems: Mutual information and correlations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 070502 (2008).
[115] P. Calabrese, J. Cardy, and E. Tonni, Entanglement entropy of
two disjoint intervals in conformal field theory, J. Stat. Mech.
Theory Exp. 2009, P11001 (2009).
[116] V. Marić and M. Fagotti, Universality in the tripartite information after global quenches, Phys. Rev. B 108, L161116 (2023).
[117] V. Marić and M. Fagotti, Universality in the tripartite information after global quenches: (generalised) quantum XY models,
J. High Energy Phys. 2023 (6), 140.
[118] P. C. Hohenberg and B. I. Halperin, Theory of dynamic critical
phenomena, Rev. Mod. Phys. 49, 435 (1977).
[119] A. Altland, M. Fleischhauer, and S. Diehl, Symmetry Classes
of Open Fermionic Quantum Matter, Phys. Rev. X 11, 021037
(2021).
[120] S. Lieu, M. McGinley, and N. R. Cooper, Tenfold Way for
Quadratic Lindbladians, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 040401 (2020).
[121] L. Sá, P. Ribeiro, and T. Prosen, Symmetry Classification of
Many-Body Lindbladians: Tenfold Way and Beyond, Phys.
Rev. X 13, 031019 (2023).
[122] K. Kawabata, A. Kulkarni, J. Li, T. Numasawa, and S. Ryu,
Symmetry of Open Quantum Systems: Classification of Dissipative Quantum Chaos, PRX Quantum 4, 030328 (2023).
[123] E. Starchl, M. H. Fischer, and L. M. Sieberer, Code and data
for “Generalized Zeno effect and entanglement dynamics induced by fermion counting” (2025).
[124] H.-P. Breuer and F. Petruccione, The Theory of Open Quantum
Systems (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2007).

